The KwaZulu-Natal Department of Human Settlements says an agreement has been reached for essential services to be provided to the Sacca informal settlement in Mkondeni, Pietermaritzburg. This comes after the informal settlement dwellers embarked on protest action on Thursday. Police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said a group of people from the Sacca informal settlement embarked on protest action and barricaded the corner of Murray Road, CB Down Road and Old Field Road in Mkondeni with burning tyres. “The window of a police vehicle was damaged by the unruly protestors,” she said. Gwala said a case of public violence had been opened at Alexandra Road SAPS. Vic Winterbach, councillor for ward 36, which includes parts of Scottsville, Pelham and Hayfields, said the protest action crossed over into his ward. Winterbach said the issues involved the municipal political leadership’s unkept promises to the community regarding the provision of housing, electricity, water and sanitation. Mbulelo Baloyi, the spokesperson for the Department of Human Settlements, said that after Thursday’s protest, it was agreed that while housing issues were being resolved, the Interim Services Policy had to be implemented. The policy entails the provision of water, sanitation and prepaid electricity, as well as the creation of access footpaths and pathways for emergency vehicles. “This has to happen within the next six months whilst negotiations to get additional land are still in progress,” he said. Describing the area, Baloyi said the settlement fell within an industrial estate. He said the Msunduzi Municipality had initiated an informal settlement upgrade programme to build houses for the informal settlement dwellers. Baloyi said the municipality approached the department for assistance. About 7 hectares of land within the settlement was purchased for the upgrade. However, he said the population of the informal settlement grew from about 1 500 to about 3 500 residents. He said extra land had to be acquired and a move was made to purchase additional land adjacent to the informal settlement. Baloyi said some of that land was the subject of a land claim. “There are ongoing processes by both the Msunduzi Municipality and the Human Settlements Department to request the landowners to release the land for sale. If that fails, the Department reserves the right to pursue expropriation mechanisms,” he said.