Durban - The eThekwini Municipality has said delays in forming a municipal entity to run the city’s bus service are due to ongoing litigation with current operator Tansnat and lack of capacity. This was contained in a road map report that came before the city’s executive committee meeting this week. The process for the establishment of the Durban transport municipal entity has been delayed following the approval given by council in May 2018. According to a report to council, this was caused by the lack of a dedicated team to drive the project. An updated implementation roadmap was this week presented for formal approval by council. According to the report, when the city attempted to implement some of the actions on the roadmap - specifically the preparation for the appointment of the operations management support for the municipal entity - a legal challenge was lodged by Tansnat. The matter is currently in court. Another aspect requiring formal approval by council was that of shareholding in the municipal entity. When the council passed the resolution in May 2018, there was no formal approval of whether there would be any shareholding, by private individuals or entities, in the municipal entity. The city had to also take into account the stipulation in the Municipal Finance Management Act - that in the event of a private shareholding in a municipal entity, the municipality must be a majority shareholder. It was recommended that shareholding by private individuals or entities, especially existing public transport operators in the city, should be approved. It was recommended that a percentage shareholding of 40% be made available for the participation of private individual entities. “This will ensure that the city not only complies with the requirements of the municipal Financial Management Act in retaining a majority shareholding in the entity, but makes a significant portion available for private sector participation and the transformation of the public transport sector in the city,” the report read. The IFP and ANC supported the report, however the DA opposed it. DA caucus leader Nicole Graham said they believed the roadmap would only uphold the status quo, which did not serve eThekwini’s residents. The Mercury