Durban - Planned water interruptions in Sea Cow Lake and surrounding areas in the north of Durban will take place from today. EThekwini Municipality said the planned water shutdown would start at 6pm and would run until the early hours of tomorrow. The municipality’s spokesperson, Msawakhe Mayisela, said the city’s Water and Sanitation Unit would embark on this process to carry out strategic tie-ins of the new 500mm steel pipeline along the new Bus Rapid Transit route. Mayisela said the route needs to be connected to the existing Sea Cow Lake/ Springfield Park reticulation outlet for the new GO! Durban Project. “This development is necessary to ensure that the distribution of water from the reservoir is not interjected and that the system is balanced. Residents are advised that suburbs and zones supplied from the Sea Cow Lake/ Springfield Park reservoir will not have a water supply during the period of the shutdown,” said Mayisela. According to the municipality, other areas affected included Inanda and Peters roads in Springfield Park, Hippo Road, a section of Parlock Drive, Barvale Drive and Carden Crescent, and areas south of uMngeni River. Construction would also affect Johanna and Sea Cow Lake roads, part of North Coast Road, Roadhouse Crescent, part of Riverside and Dahlia roads, Foxglove Place, Ribes Place and Lotus Road. Residents in Alpine, Redfern, Umgeni, Carinthia and Garforth roads would also be affected. “The municipality apologises for any inconvenience caused and requests residents to ensure that all taps are closed properly to guard against wastage when the water has been restored,” Mayisela added. Meanwhile, Newcastle municipality has issued a notice to residents that uThukela Water is supplying less water (25 megalitres) due to less raw water being extracted from the Buffalo River. According to head of communications Mlungisi Khumalo, a few areas in Newcastle East - Osizweni, eMadadeni - would experience low pressure during peak times. “The municipal technical team will be meeting this week to explore possible solutions to address the matter.” The Mercury