Durban - Two teachers in KwaZulu-Natal have been suspended after allegations that they were having a “love affair” with the same pupil. The provincial Department of Education said yesterday the teachers were from uMlazi Comprehensive Technical High School. It is alleged that one of the teachers was caught by other staff kissing the 18-year-old pupil in the library toilet. The Grade 12 pupil in question also confirmed that she had a relationship with not one, but two teachers in the same school, the department said. “We have always said that the vast majority of our teachers are consummate professionals who are committed to the teaching profession, but there are those who are still hell-bent on tarnishing the image of the noble profession. “We have zero tolerance for teachers who abuse their profession and take advantage of pupils, hence we have taken a decision to suspend the two teachers,” Education MEC Kwazi Mshengu said. Meanwhile, the latest crime statistics reveal rising levels of violence in schools. Widespread violent fights between pupils and teachers, and even murder, have been recorded. The statistics, released by Police Minister Bheki Cele on Friday, revealed that bullying at schools across the country had led to 546 incidents of common assault, 345 cases of assault with intent to cause grievous bodily harm, 19 attempted murders and 9 murders. It also found that among pupils attacking other pupils, there had been about 101 cases of common assault, 16 of assault with intent to do grievous bodily harm, 17 cases of attempted murder and 19 murders. In one incident a pupil killed a teacher, with 710 incidents of common assault, 1160 incidents of assault with intent to cause grievous bodily harm and two incidents of attempted murder also being recorded. In incidents where teachers had attacked pupils, there were 567 common assault cases, 151 of assault with intent to cause grievous boldly harm, five attempted murders and one murder. The statistics showed no cases of murder or attempted murder related to bullying at schools in the province. The province recorded 167 incidents of assault with intent to do grievous bodily harm at schools as a result of bullying. Sixty-one rapes had occurred at educational institutions that included schools. Basil Manuel, executive director of teachers’ union Naptosa, said that the statistics raised concerns about safety in schools. He said schools were a microcosm of society and whatever happened in society spilt over to schools. “Society in South Africa is known to be violent and we have a long history of violence with very little intervention to try to address the problems. “Schools lack early intervention measures, such as school and guidance counselling, where we could address the problem before it happens. Manuel said the issue of counsellors had been raised with the department, and while there was an acknowledgement of the need, it was always juxtaposed with affordability. National Teachers’ Union president Allen Thompson said the increase of violence in schools was not surprising and nothing had been done to improve the security at schools. He said there should be security guards in schools who worked closely with the local police station and there should be regular patrols close to the schools. Department spokesperson Sihle Mlotshwa said the department did not have a breakdown of statistics of incidents in KZN. The Mercury