Durban - The South African Social Security Agency is appealing for witnesses to come forward if they have information that could assist police following robberies and two Sassa paypoints in KZN this week. Sassa KZN regional executive manager, Themba Matlou, said while every effort was made to protect officials and beneficiaries during pay days, they were appealing to beneficiaries to be vigilant and exercise caution. In the first robbery on Thursday morning, an armed gang made off with an undisclosed amount of money from a pay point in Thafamasi, Ndwedwe. A security guard was also attacked and robbed of his firearm. "The gunmen then fled the scene in a South African Post Office hired double-cab bakkie which had officials’ cellphones, belongings and work equipment. “Two officials suffered mild injuries as they ran for cover while others were left traumatised. No beneficiaries were harmed during this ordeal. A case of theft and armed robbery will be opened at Ndwedwe Police Station," Sassa KZN spokesperson, Sandy Godlwana, said. In a previous incident in Ingwavuma which is over 200km north of Empangeni, robbers made off with cash which was meant to be paid to grantees. Godlwana said it was unfortunate criminals targeted grant pay points on the days they knew beneficiaries would arrive in numbers to access their grants. “It’s unfortunate that our clients had to experience this incident. We are comforted that no beneficiary was harmed during the robbery and all our clients were safe," she said. She said the department viewed such actions by criminals as hazardous to beneficiaries and appeal to law enforcement agencies to act swiftly to arrest the suspects. Affected beneficiaries have been referred to the Post Office in Ngwavuma to access their grants said Godlwana. Matlou added they will ensure that security at these pay points was beefed up to ensure beneficiaries received their grants under safe conditions. "It’s unfortunate that our clients had to experience this incident and that some officials were injured, this is a selfish act by these robbers who are placing the lives of the vulnerable groups under further financial strain. We appeal to law enforcement agencies to act swiftly to arrest these criminals,” he said. Meanwhile, the SA Post Office (SAPO) has appealed to Social Relief of Distress (SRD) grant beneficiaries to wait until they received two SMSes before going to the post office to collect their R350 grant. SAPO apologised for the delayed payments caused by logistical challenges last week after unexpected numbers of beneficiaries arrived to collect their grant. SAPO spokesperson, Nobuhle Njapha, said the first SMS would indicate if the application was approved and the second would ask the recipient to go to a Post Office to collect their R350. “The Post Office uses SMS messages to tell customers that they can go to collect their grant, and makes sure they have cash to pay the customers who received an SMS,” she said. Njapha said nobody should go to one of their branches before they have received the second SMS. “To solve this problem the Post Office will now only pay beneficiaries who received the SMS asking them to visit their nearest post office,” said Njapha. The Mercury