Durban - After being at home for 158 days since schools closed under the national lockdown on March 18, millions of KwaZulu-Natal pupils will return to school this week. Grades R, 1, 6, 10 and 11 will return today and tomorrow. Grades 2, 5, 8 and 9 on Wednesday and Thursday, and grades 3, 4, 10 and 11 on Friday. All the schools will have to operate at 50% capacity and alternate the attendance of grades. Personal protective equipment (PPE) has already been delivered to more than 6000 schools in the province. Premier Sihle Zikalala said while most schools were prepared and ready to welcome the full complement of pupils, three districts were still waiting for their PPE, but this was expected to be delivered by this morning. During a media briefing yesterday, Zikalala said the outstanding delivery of PPE was due to cancellations by appointed service providers who failed to deliver on time. He said the return of all grades to school meant the Education Department needed to employ other mechanisms to ensure social distancing, including procuring mobile classrooms for selected schools across the province, where even the differentiated time-tabling could not assist in keeping with social-distancing protocols. “We further emphasise that the safety of our pupils, teachers and management team is a priority in everything that we do, and we will not compromise on that,” Zikalala said. KZN Education MEC Kwazi Mshengu said that every pupil would be given two face masks. He said that 5979 teachers had applied for a concession due to comorbidities to continue teaching from home or attend school to teach their lessons only and then leave. “Of the 5979 teachers who applied, 4475 qualified for the concession. The remainder of the applications were referred to the health risk inspector to make a decision,” he said. Mshengu added that about 2000 posts for substitute teachers were also advertised, as they would assist in those classrooms where teachers qualified for the concessions to remain at home. To ensure the consistent provision of water to all schools, the department has initiated a programme to drill boreholes. Currently, 600 schools have been identified for the immediate drilling of boreholes, while studies to ascertain the availability of underground water in other schools were proceeding, Zikalala said. He said the department had also identified a number of improper kitchen structures at schools across the province, which are a health hazard to pupils and food handlers. The department had procured 317 mobile kitchens for the prioritised schools and delivery was already taking place, Zikalala added. Although KZN was seeing a reduction in the number of infections, Zikalala said the province was still the second most affected by the prevalence of Covid-19 infections, after Gauteng. Since last Saturday, KZN registered 4713 new cases and 276 deaths. The average daily infection rate was recorded at 198 cases per 100000 of the population, “which is a drastic improvement from 309 per 100000 population when we were registering 3755 cases of daily infections”. “We are very clear, however, that even if our statistics are showing a downward trend in Covid-19 infections, KZN currently has a total of 109332 cases, 1949 deaths, and 85055 recoveries. Of the 544 new cases recorded this weekend, eThekwini District recorded 43%, followed by uMgungundlovu at 18%. “There is a remarkable decrease in average daily cases, from 2289 since the beginning of August to 670 currently,” Zikalala said. KZN recorded 13 new Covid-19 related deaths this weekend. Of the newly reported deaths, King Cetshwayo District had the highest number. The province had a cumulative total of 1949 deaths since the beginning of the pandemic. The eThekwini Municipality has contributed 932 of the reported deaths. The median age for the deaths remained at 62 years and more than half of the deceased patients were women. “Even though the number of cases seems to be down, we are still very concerned about the number of patients who are not presenting themselves early to health-care facilities. We appeal to all our people to know that Covid-19 is not a death sentence. The high number of recoveries confirms that with early detection, lives can be saved,” Zikalala said. He said the province was also closely monitoring the impact of inter-provincial travel, which meant there were now more vehicles on the roads, as well as more free movement of people, as the economy increasingly opened up. Zikalala said this carried with it a high risk of person-to-person transmissions. “People may be tempted to think that Covid-19 is no longer a threat, which is very far from the truth. As we have said before, a second and stronger wave of infections is something that we cannot afford. “We have seen this in other countries and we must learn from the painful experiences they have gone through,” Zikalala said. The Mercury