Durban - Consumers, including professionals such as lawyers and doctors, are turning to debt review as a means to survive the economic crisis. Economists estimate that between 1.4 million and 3 million jobs have been lost due to the lockdown, businesses have closed permanently and many of the jobs shed will not be recovered. Neil Roets, chief executive of Debt Rescue, said the firm’s recent survey of 1000 consumers found 85% of South Africans say they need help financially, emotionally or both, as a result of the pandemic, while 55% require financial assistance but have no access to credit. He said the survey showed that “virtually the entire population” was in “deep trouble and have no idea from where or how help is coming”. Roets said only 26% of the respondents had successfully applied for a payment holiday, while 51% said they had no savings. Roets said the firm had experienced a “huge increase” in debt-review enquiries. “The most worrisome of all is the fact that we are now seeing the top earners on the ladder, such as doctors, lawyers and corporate executives, knocking on our door to place them under debt review. “These are the people who typically paid the most taxes to keep the government afloat,” Roets said. Efficient Group economist Dawie Roodt said at least 3 million jobs had been lost due the lockdown, of which 1 million had been shed permanently. “A recession is part of the cycle economies go through and businesses save money for recessions, which is not really a bad thing because it’s a time to get rid of dead wood, like a veld fire, and then growth comes back,” he said. “A depression is different, where an economy is really broken, when it’s not going to be seeing green shoots in many instances. “This is a depression, where the SA economy is not going to bounce back and many businesses are going to close down forever,” Roodt said. Roodt said that apparently hundreds of wine farms would not reopen. “This is permanent damage, it’s not just a bruise, and the fiscal accounts have got completely out of hand. “There is no way Tito Mboweni is going to turn around fiscal accounts, because he would have to cut state spending chronically and organised labour won’t allow that,” he said. Roodt estimated that the GDP would contract to -10%, and it would take six to seven years to recover to 2019 production levels and more than 10 years for per capita GDP to bounce back. “Agriculture will bounce back very quickly, but mining and manufacturing are going to battle because they have electricity issues, and in the services industry we have a few real winners like finance and asset management which is doing well. “The biggest losers are the hospitality sector where restaurants and hotels are closing down,” Roodt said However, he said tourism could potentially recover quicker, but it would not reach 2019 levels because of permanent damage such as airlines closing down and higher prices. “The average South African will be knocked back to where he was in 1981 - in terms of per capita income, we have lost 40 years,” he said. PwC economist Christie Viljoen forecast GDP would contract by -9% in 2020. “We expect to see a net loss of 1.4 million jobs by the end of the year and I know that is less than the 3 million that has been going around, but that was based on the survey in April when most people were sitting at home. “The disclaimer is the worst was over in second quarter in terms of the economic data,” he said. Viljoen said he expected the economy to take three years to creep back to 2019 GDP levels. “We are obviously going to see growth next year but it’s coming from a low base. We will be picking up our head from how terrible 2020 was,” he said. “It’s good news for the economy that we’ve moved to level 2 and are getting closer towards normalising the economy, but there are still lots of limitations they have put in place from a health perspective, such as restrictions on the sale of alcohol,” Viljoen said. But many consumers continue to battle financially in the wake of the lockdown. The Mercury