Durban - The Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF) has started processing applications for July and August Covid-19 Temporary Employer-Employee Relief Scheme (Ters) benefits. This follows the signing of the new directive on an extended period of benefits by Minister of Employment and Labour Thulas Nxesi last week. The directives stated that the employers, or employees, may claim Covid-19 Ters benefits for the extension period starting from July 1 until August 15. It covers the employees whose employers were not permitted to commence operations under the Disaster Management Regulations. It also covers those employers who were unable to make alternative arrangements for vulnerable workers, such as working from home or taking special measures under the Occupational Health and Safety Act. Employers who were unable to make use of their services because of operational requirements caused by compliance with the regulations and directions would also qualify to apply. UIF said the application process would remain the same for the extension period and all claims should be lodged via the online portal. “As with previous claim processes, to apply in the new period, employers are required to upload similar documentation,” said UIF commissioner Teboho Maruping. He said this included signed approval or acceptance letter, bank confirmation letter, proof of payment to employees and refunds to the UIF if applicable. He said in keeping with strict governance principles, they would still subject payments to bank verification before releasing the funds into applicants’ accounts. “The immediate past has taught us that even under the pandemic, criminals are at large and looking to benefit through their nefarious means. “We have an obligation to do everything in our power to ensure that those funds are not paid into the incorrect accounts,” he said. He said the fund would issue a letter to employers who had applied for Covid-19 Ters benefits outlining the process to be followed when making applications for the extension period. He said the new direction and the extension had been subject to a robust discussion with social partners who had agreed that the cut-off date for the application window for April and May would be September 15. Maruping said all new applications for these periods must be uploaded on or before this date to qualify for processing and payment. The Mercury