The challenges presented by the Covid-19 pandemic have pushed the topic of personal protective equipment (PPE) into the spotlight like never before. While PPE has long been a feature of good occupational health and safety standards, the global fight against the spread of the novel coronavirus has made protective wear vital for everyone. Face masks, face shields, quality sanitisers and no-touch thermometers are now must-haves for South African households and businesses, big and small. And with trading activity slowly resuming, safety in the workplace has never been so important. KZN's Leading Safety Workwear Companies digital magazine shines the spotlight on local businesses that are stepping up to the plate in providing top-quality protective gear. Companies like: * Palm Footwear, a proudly South African and family-owned business that specialises in quality safety footwear. With the production and development of its own raw materials, it is able to deliver responsible, “earth friendly” footwear that ticks all the quality boxes. * The BBF Safety Group, the largest manufacturer of safety footwear in Southern Africa. It highlights the importance of buying homegrown products, and how the group is helping empower local suppliers to collaborate in the creation of safety products that are 100% South African-made. * Safety & Allied Products, a Durban-based leading supplier of work safety wear and safety products. With a 25-year track record, it offers a comprehensive range of quality personal protective and related safety equipment together with efficient, excellence-driven service. *  North Safety Products Africa (NSPA), one of South Africa's leading designers, manufacturers and suppliers of personal protection and safety equipment intended for use in the workplace. As a leader in the industry, it takes enormous pride in using innovative methods to develop high quality products that meet stringent technical requirements. * Idube Safety, which caters to a wide array of industries that require exceptional and superior safety products. With more than 90 years of combined experience in the PPE business, it is also able to offer expert technical advice and training on its vast range of products. Read this free digital magazine here.