Durban - Four more airports have been given the green light to resume operations. On Tuesday, Minister of Transport Fikile Mbalula announced that Mthatha, Hoedspruit, Phalaborwa and Margate airports would resume operations under level 2 of the national lockdown. He said already 14 airports have been given permission to operate. Mbalula added that international air travel remains prohibited in alert level 2.     AVIATION Air travel is crucial to our efforts to gradually resume economic activity.  In re-opening our airspace, we have put protocols in place to determine the state of readiness for our airports to resume operations in a phased manner #StaySafe @ATNSSA @Airports_ZA pic.twitter.com/TroXrWkBdc     He said that for the undertaking of short-distance public transport of 200km or less, buses, mini-buses, midi-buses, e-hailing services, metered taxis, shuttle service, chauffeur-driven vehicles and scholar transport vehicles are permitted to carry 100% of their maximum licence capacity. "Rail operations are permitted to carry a maximum of 70% of their licensed passenger capacity. Long-distance passenger rail is now permitted to resume operations subject to the passenger capacity restriction," Mbalula said.     Rail operations are permitted to carry a maximum of 70 % of their licensed passenger capacity.  Long distance passenger rail is now permitted to resume operations subject to the passenger capacity restriction #StaySafe @PRASA_Group pic.twitter.com/6R7Vgn7zxU     He explained that regarding the maritime industry, foreign crew changes were permitted at the Cape Town port and Port of Durban. He explained that a request for crew changes must be submitted to the Department of Transport at least four days in advance.     MARITIME In line with the gradual easing of restrictions, foreign crew changes are permitted only at the Cape Town Port and at the Port of Durban, subject to compliance with the following conditions: #StaySafe pic.twitter.com/YDw12cl4Qc     The minister announced that cruise ships remain prohibited from calling at any of the South African ports except for the disembarkation of the returning of South African crew or South African citizens or holders of permanent residence permits. IOL