Durban - At least four Msunduzi Municipality security officials were injured during violent clashes with waste pickers trying to force their way on to the New England Road landfill site in Pietermaritzburg. The clashes on Friday erupted after the municipality removed waste pickers from the site. They were told they were being removed for their safety after a fire at the dump that burned for more than a week. However, some of the waste pickers refused to leave and set a fire on the perimeter of the landfill. The situation intensified as waste pickers clashed with municipal security. A member of the waste pickers’ forum, who declined to be named, said their members left the site on Tuesday after they were told to leave. “We were called by the municipal officials who told us that the site would not be available to us until further notice as they tried to address some of the challenges there. We informed our members and some of them were not happy with the news, but we left on Tuesday,” he said. Municipal spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said waste pickers forced their way on to the dump site, causing a stand-off between them and security, and they vandalised municipal property. “It is quite a concern that in light of Covid-19, the waste pickers are not complying as they are not wearing PPE (personal protective equipment). The municipality will engage with their association to pave a way forward. The security guards were attacked and they were forced to defend themselves. “Action will be taken to prevent any criminal acts that seek to cause instability at the site,” she said. Mafumbatha said the site was only open to customers. DA councillor Ross Strachan said the party was concerned about the lack of political will and urgency to deal with the dump site. “The violent conflict that broke out between the officials and the waste pickers which forced the municipality to close the site with immediate effect, has a dramatic impact on local business and individuals dependent on it for income,” he said. The Mercury