Durban - At least 38 foreign-trained doctors are challenging the Health Professions Council of South Africa (HPCSA) in court after it allegedly backtracked on its decision to allow them to write their board exams. The doctors recently filed papers at the Gauteng High Court. According to court documents, the council had initially stated that it did not “recognise” the medical institutions they studied at, which were in China, Romania and Guyana. Advocate Rene Govender of the SA Internationally Trained Health Professionals Association, who is representing the doctors, said the issue had been ongoing with the council since at least 2018. She said that the HPCSA refused to allow graduates the opportunity to write board examinations on the grounds that they had to produce a certificate of internship from the country where they obtained their degree; a certificate of good standing from the regulatory authority where the applicant trained as a medical practitioner; and proof of registration with the regulatory authority where the applicant trained as a medical practitioner. “This regulation clearly indicates inconsistency and double standards practised by the HPCSA, as they have applied the rules differently for graduates who applied to write the board examinations in the past,” she said. Govender said it was also well known, as in the case of all medical students who studied out of their countries, that they would not be able to provide a certificate of internship from the country in which they had studied, as they had had student visas and not work permits to enable employment for an internship. “This, therefore, meant that their application to register for the board examinations would be declined,” she said. According to the founding affidavit by one of the applicants, Dr Sarvashni Chetty, who studied at the Texila American University in Guyana, all the applicants were forced to study abroad due to the limited capacity of local universities to accommodate all deserving candidates. “The decision to study abroad was not only at a huge financial cost, but also required sacrifices and commitment by families to fund these studies abroad. “Each applicant chose to study medicine at universities that are listed in the World Directory of Medical Schools. “Each applicant made an effort before going abroad to make enquiries with the HPCSA as to whether their university of choice is, in fact, recognised by the HPCSA,” she said. Chetty said their choice of universities was based on this important criterion, that would allow them to return to South Africa, write the board exams and thereafter practise as medical doctors in their country of birth. The Mercury