Durban - Field guide Sheldon Hooper, who was gouged to death by an elephant while conducting routine work at a private Limpopo game reserve, has been remembered as an avid photographer who was passionate about nature. Thornybush River Lodge chief executive and warden of the reserve Trevor Jordan said he was off-site when the incident occurred on Tuesday morning. He said Hooper, 27, and a colleague were checking the electric fence, which is designed to keep elephants away from the area surrounding the lodges, when he was attacked. He said Hooper and his colleague were working about 20m apart at the time. “These elephants had come in and they had breached the gate or they could have come in through the fence. They were a family group of nine elephants - three cows and juvenile elephants and a very small one. Sheldon was walking and surprised the elephants, I think they surprised each other, and made contact at the same time,” Jordan said. “It wasn’t a charge of some rogue elephant. From what we can make out from the scene, it was a reaction to protect the young ones,” he said. Jordan said Hooper and his colleague had scattered and the elephant probably chased him for about 10m before catching up to him and gouging him with a tusk just above his heart, below the collar bone. He also sustained a gaping wound to his leg but he managed to call for help before succumbing to his injuries at the scene, Jordan said. “The guy who was with him ran to get help. Sheldon phoned the lodge manager and his girlfriend, Rebecca, who went out to the scene where he was giving them directions and telling them how to tie a tourniquet,” he said. Jordan said the lodge had sought advice from Elephants Alive, which had consulted with six experts on whether the animal should be euthanised. “There were signs of blood on the tusk - she was an elderly matriarch looking after the young one. They showed no aggression and were completely and totally relaxed, you couldn’t get a more relaxed cow. We had to take a decision to euthanise or not to euthanise but we decided not to euthanise,” he said. Michelle du Plessis, managing director of the Field Guide Association of South Africa, of which Hooper was a member, said a friend at the reserve had notified her about the incident. “It is such a dynamic and rewarding profession and for anybody to lose their life in that line of duty, it is a tragedy. Sheldon would have changed so many people’s lives and made a difference in offering them awesome guided experiences,” she said. Retired game ranger and former manager of Ndumo Game Reserve in KwaZulu-Natal Paul Dutton said: “Young dedicated field men are too valuable to lose such as in this terrible tragedy.” Tributes highlighting Hooper’s passion and dedication to his profession were shared on his personal Facebook page. Cathi Robbins wrote: “Sheldon, you were not just our guide, twice a day, every day for that amazing week in June 2018, you also had all your meals with us We were mesmerised by your stories of the bush, inspired by your love for photography, and awed by your genuine kindness and respect for all nature. We became friends. “You were a brilliant photographer and taught us so much during our photography class; an amazing guide, always reverent and respectful of nature; and a beautiful, kind, genuine human being. You will be missed by so many The world was sweeter when you were here.” Kerry Lee Roberg wrote: “You are one of the most genuine & kind hearted people I’ve had the pleasure of knowing and I’m so happy I was able to work alongside you. The courageous way in which you lived your own brand every day no matter what anyone thought is so admirable and we will spend this lifetime remembering an absolute solid man.” 