Durban - WHEN lockdown restrictions prevented a group of Unisa graduates from attending a formal graduation, they decided to hold one at the weekend. This was the brainchild of KwaDukuza graduate Sinqobile Mdletshe, 28. “I decided that the pandemic would not stop me from celebrating.” Mdletshe reached out to students who had been studying with her. She said the group of 15 met at the Sunken Gardens at Snell Parade at the weekend and had practised physical distancing. Some travelled from as far as Jozini and uMhlabauyalingana. Mdletshe said she would not have completed the Bachelor of Social Work degree without her family’s support. “My family were so proud of me. They never gave up on me.” She chose the degree because she was a social person and wanted to make a difference in society. “I want to bring hope and love to those who need love and those who are damaged.” Mdletshe is continuing with her studies at Unisa through a Bachelor of Arts in Forensic Science and Technology degree. Ayanda Tembe, another graduate, said she was the first person at her home to get a degree. She was sad they could not stay longer with each other at the informal graduation because they had to keep it short for safety reasons. They hoped to meet again once restrictions were over. The road to finishing her qualifications was not an easy one. The 29-year-old said she had to get odd jobs to finance her studies. For the KwaDukuza resident, Saturday’s ceremony brought an end to a journey that was filled with challenges. “We got closure. We were happy. I have always wanted to be a social worker, but my mother didn't know what a social worker did and I had to explain it to her.” Once her mother, Mbali, understood, she suggested her daughter start doing volunteer work and Mbali started working at a local hospice while still at high school, then worked at Lifeline after completing matric. She said social work brought her out of her shell. She began making friends when she reached out for help with her studies, which were difficult due to large amounts of practical work and reports they had to file. She also learnt how to think outside of the box. Tembe plays the clarinet for the SAPS Band and is also looking to further her studies. Unisa KwaZulu-Natal spokesperson Siyabonga Seme said the institution welcomed students who took initiative to tell their own stories about their experiences at the institution. He, however, said that while doing this they should practise physical distancing and good safety protocols. Daily News