Durban - The Department of Correctional Services (DCS) said a second stabbing incident in the last four days at Durban’s Westville Prison has raised a serious concern about where the weapons are coming from. KwaZulu-Natal DCS spokesperson, Thulani Mdluli said  an inmate stabbed another inmate during a tussle at the weekend. “There were 44 offenders outside their cell ready for breakfast as a procedure when suddenly a commotion of one offender stabbing another offender with a sharpened object occurred.” Mdluli said the Emergency Support Team (EST) and Dog Unit quickly disarmed the perpetrator and two others who were a part of the incident. “In the process of disarming offenders using minimum force, five offenders including the victim sustained injuries and have been transferred to external hospital for medical attention,” he said. Mduli said after the incident, the serving of breakfast continued as usual and regular working conditions returned to normal. Last Thursday, a group of inmates attacked prison wardens within the same unit of the prison. “There was an offender on official security-related incident which occurred at the very same centre in the very same unit, where five knives that were used during the incident were confiscated,” said Mdluli. He said these incidents were alarming because no visits were allowed at any of the correctional centres around the country due to Covid 19 yet there were weapons found inside centres. “In order to mitigate the situation, all these offenders involved will immediately be degraded and transferred to eBongweni Maximum Centre and other maximum facilities outside the region,” he said. Chief Operations Commissioner Mandla Mkabela, conducted an operational visit to Westville Correctional Centre. “As a country we must be focusing on protecting and helping one another on how best to curb the spread of Covid-19 instead of focusing on these unfortunate incidents,” he said. He condemned the incident and said an internal investigation had been launched and the department would not leave any stone unturned. Mkabela said disciplinary actions will be taken against all individuals implicated during the investigation,  including officials and offenders, without fear or favour. “We will continue to uphold our centres as theatres of operations not as war zones because we have to focus on providing the best correctional services for safer South Africa,” he said. The Mercury