Durban - Dozens of luxury tour buses and coaches painted with slogans such as “open tourism now”, “no food” and “save our jobs” took to the streets of Durban in a slow-drive protest on Wednesday to highlight the plight of operators who are demanding a refund of millions of rand in licence fees. Private Passenger Charter Association chairperson Fiona Brooke-Leggatt said operators, who serviced the tourism and education sectors as well as private companies, had not been able to work during lockdown and were on the brink of collapse if they did not receive financial assistance. She said operators paid licence fees of about R50000 per bus upfront every six months, and some operators had paid around R500 000 for their fleets. Buses, accompanied by tour guides and owners of guest houses in their vehicles, gathered at the Kings Park swimming pool parking lot before driving slowing through the CBD and on to uMhlanga to draw attention to the crisis facing their sector. Brooke-Leggatt handed a a memorandum highlighting the challenges faced by the industry to Sharon Hoosen, DA spokesperson for Transport, and to Heinz de Boer, DA spokesperson for Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs, who will deliver it to the KZN Legislature and to MEC for Transport, Bheki Ntuli and MEC for Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs, Nomusa Dube-Ncube. Brooke-Leggatt said the sector wanted the government to treat it the same as it had others in the transport industry, such as minibus taxis which had received support of R1.135billion. She said operators also wanted a refund of their bus licence fees that were paid upfront every six months at a cost of around R50000 a bus, because their buses had not been able to use the roads. She said the refunds would help to save bus operators’ businesses, many of which were small family owned firms, while they remained shut. The association has also drafted a petition demanding that licence fees be refunded. Brooke-Leggatt said the opening of intra-provincial tourism would not help the sector. “We want our licences repaid back to ourselves and for the government to assist us and engage with us as they do with the taxi sector. We have handed in and submitted emails, and they have not tried to engage us. There are thousands of employees affected, and if they don’t engage us we will continue with the protest action in different cities every week,” she said. Ricallan Travel and Tours chief financial officer Sandra Roopram said her family had been in the bus business for 50 years and relied on providing transport to private schools and sport events. “Our business at the moment is zilch. On March 16, they all started cancelling jobs, the UIF has not paid and the banks are now wanting their money. We paid our licences in good faith and now in good faith they must refund us. What have they done with our licence fees? Have they paid them to the taxi industry in the R1bn bailout? “We are not asking government for a hand-out. We want what is ours,” Roopram said. Barathi Rambaly, the owner of Richmar Tours, said the lockdown had “crippled” her business. KZN Transport spokesperson Kwanele Ncalane earlier said the department shared the industry’s frustrations and would engage with it to take their submissions to the minister of transport for consideration. The Mercury