Durban - The Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) in KwaZulu-Natal has warned that putting traditional courts secretaries on its payroll will cost millions and plunge the department into bankruptcy. The department gave a detailed report on the employment of the secretaries to members of the Cogta portfolio committee yesterday. This followed numerous strikes by the secretaries complaining about poor pay. One such strike led to a negative audit outcome after secretaries refused to work, including co-operating with the office of the auditor-general during the audit. There are about 299 secretaries across the province, who receive a stipend of R1600 per month and have not received an increase in years. The current stipend amounts to R5.7 million per year. Thando Tubane, head of the department, said they had determined that based on the employee grading system that would be used to employ secretaries, the department would need an extra R40m. He said the department’s finances were already under pressure because izinduna salaries took a large chunk of the budget. He warned that if they allowed the situation to prevail, the department would only employ people and deliver no services. There were about 3000 izinduna across the province, 300 amakhosi and they all receive a government salary. “To increase the stipend for secretaries is something that we would like to do, but it is simply not affordable at this stage,” he said. Tubane said it was difficult to manage the issues of traditional leadership in the province because of the large numbers. “Other provinces have four izinduna and as such it is easy for them to take a position and do the best they can, while in KwaZulu-Natal there are many people and we have to replicate this many times,” he said. IFP Cogta member Otto Kunene said it was concerning that the secretaries had not received an increase in many years. “If they were paid R1600 a few years ago, because of inflation, that money has now been reduced to R1000, we ask the department to find them an increase even of R500 to make this stipend mean something.” However, other committee members warned that members should not attempt to prescribe to the department on how they should handle issues of staffing as that was crossing the line. ANC committee member Sifiso Sonjica accused Kunene of politicising the issue. “We should not get into the issues of the department that could come back to bite us. “Our country is facing a very difficult time in terms of finance.” Another ANC committee member Makhosazana Zungu said to engage on the issue of salary increases in the current financial climate would be toying with people’s emotions. The Mercury