Durban - Tributes continue to pour in for radio legend Bob Mabena who passed away at the age of 51 following a cardiac arrest on Monday. The icon, whose radio and broadcasting career spanned over three decades, worked on Radio Metro and popular TV music show Studio Mix, among others. In 1994 he received a South African Music Award for his hit song Get Funky. Mabena was the co-host of radio show Power Breakfast (Power FM) alongside Faith Mangope. “The family is coming to terms with his passing and respectfully requests the public to afford them the appropriate space,” said Power 98.7 management. On the day he died, Mabena posted a line from a Robert Herrick poem on social media called To the Virgins, to Make Much of Time. “Gather ye Rose-buds while ye may, Old Time is still a-flying: And this same flower that smiles to day, To morrow will be’. Carpe Diem (seize the day)!!!!” Cosatu said Mabena would always be remembered as a modest and enthusiastic broadcaster, who commanded respect and possessed immense talent and sincerity. “He used his considerable experience in the broadcast field to serve this country with composure and fair-mindedness.” Kamohelo Motloung, Azapo’s secretary for gender and women affairs, said his pivotal role in developing and shaping radio talk shows and music would never be forgotten. TV and radio personality Redi Tlhabi said as a final-year student and intern, Mabena hired her with no radio experience as the co-host of the afternoon drive at Kaya FM in 1999. “You said ‘you are the future’. “You opened THAT first door. “I can’t believe you have left us.” DJ Fresh praised Mabena for making radio effortless. “Thanks For being patient with this kid, when he so badly wanted to join you at Radio Metro and kept giving you demos. For the texts of encouragement when I started at YFM! “For welcoming me to TV with open arms and zero attitude! IT HURTS.” President Cyril Ramaphosa said it was sad that such an iconic and household voice has gone silent. “This is a sad loss not only to Bob’s family and friends but to the broadcast fraternity and the country.” The DA said Mabena was a giant in the media industry who has left an indelible mark in music, arts and broadcasting. EFF MP Mbuyiseni Ndlozi said he was shattered at the untimely passing of Mabena. “SA radio will never be the same. “Going to speak at his shows, we always knew that he was a truly objective radio host ” The Mercury