Durban - A MEDICAL school drop-out was arrested in KwaZulu-Natal on Monday for allegedly practising as a doctor. Police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said the 24-year-old was working at a hospital in Mahlabathini, near Ulundi. She said the “doctor” was also accused of disappearing with R40 000 belonging to his colleagues. Gwala said following an investigation, it was revealed that the suspect was wanted for three other fraud cases, in Secunda and Mamelodi. “He left those two areas and then went to work in Mahlabathini as a doctor. However, he disappeared after three months with the money. “He was later arrested in Ntinini, Babanango and charged for fraud,” said Gwala. She said the suspect had produced copies of fake tertiary certificates. Police also recovered cellphones, his tertiary gown and a stethoscope, said Gwala. She added that their investigation revealed that the suspect had been a medical student for a year before he dropped out. The suspect is expected to appear in the Vryheid Magistrate’s Court later this week. The Health Professions Council of SA (HPCSA) has raised concerns about the increase in the number of fake doctors. The HPCSA said 62 unregistered practitioners had been arrested in 2019 and 2020. More than 80 allegations of illegal practice by unregistered practitioners were being investigated by the HPCSA. HPCSA Senior Manager Inspectorate Office, Eric Mphaphuli, said these bogus doctors posed a huge risk to patients. “Patients are at serious risk. When someone is not trained to prescribe medication or to examine a patient, they could make errors and prescribe the wrong medication. “They could also perform procedures that could be dangerous,” said Mphaphuli. In July this year, a 23-year-old woman, who allegedly posed as a medical intern at a number of KZN public health-care facilities, was arrested. Nokwanda Ndlovu was alleged to have consulted and treated patients in various areas including Nongoma, Nkandla, Hlabisa and Hammarsdale between November 2017 and December 2019. Mphaphuli said the council was investigating a number of allegations of bogus doctors, and once all information had been verified, they would hand the matter over to the police. “A few arrests have already been made this year, while others are looming. There are also a large number of cases being investigated by us,” he said. He added that based on their observations, the hot spots for bogus doctors included KZN, the Western Cape and Gauteng. He said the bogus doctors were found operating in mostly rural areas. According to Mphaphuli, in terms of the Health Protection Act, those found guilty of such offences could be slapped with a fine or face imprisonment ranging from 12 months to five years. He urged communities to be vigilant and report suspected bogus medical practitioners to the council or the police. “We do receive a lot of calls from the public and we encourage them to continue doing so. This crime is everywhere, but it depends on communities to report the culprits. “I know its difficult when you are sick and just want to get well. But, for your health’s sake you need to ensure that the person treating you is a trained and certified person,” he said. SA Medical Association chairperson Dr Angelique Coetzee said fraudulent medical practitioners were tarnishing the image of the profession. She said people needed to be held to account. “Someone needs to explain with regard to procurement processes how such people get past the human resources department,” said Coetzee. She said this was a clear indication that some people were not doing their jobs. “It is unacceptable that a person can be employed by a health-care facility without anyone validating their information and documents. “Why didn’t anyone notice these bogus doctors while they were on duty? That they were frauds and did not have any have medical knowledge? “This is very bad because it means we are exposing patients to fake doctors, and that should not happen,” warned Coetzee. She said HR departments should thoroughly check all applications of interns and new medical staff. “They must be registered with the HPCSA and they need to check that the application form and the person presenting it are the same. “From the first to the third year, you don’t have any medical or clinical skills. So, to have a first-year drop-out working in a hospital is unethical,” she added. The Mercury