Durban - A TONGAAT farmer wept after surveying the devastation afflicted on his land and that of a neighbour, after thousands of macadamia trees were chopped and burned, resulting in millions of rand in losses, in the latest attack on their crops. The farmer spoke to The Mercury on condition of anonymity because he and about a dozen neighbouring farmers are living in fear, after criminal elements repeatedly destroyed their crops, and twice fired shots at a farmer and his workers as they battled to extinguish a fire. He said they suspected the attacks were a backlash by hunters linked to a gambling ring. He said farmers had been plagued for months by groups of between 20 to 40 hunters, with as many as 60 dogs, who allegedly trespassed on their farms to hunt blue duiker, bush pigs and other wildlife. He said the hunters were trying to make it appear like a land claim fight when, in fact, a previous land claim on a swathe of farmland in the area had been thrown out of court with costs due to insufficient evidence. “It started off with hunting, which has been going on for quite a while. It is not for meat but purely for gambling,” he said. He said farmers had hired security guards to prevent hunters from trespassing, which they believed had led to the attacks. On the night of the latest incident last week, he said he was woken up at 1.30am when his farm manager called to report a fire. “I saw fire at my neighbour’s farm and because of the wind it started drifting into his macadamias,” he said. “On arrival, it was just devastation. They went to his farm and cut down trees and, when they left, they dropped a candle in and it takes a while to burn. I saw his trees laying down and a board there with the words ‘give us back our land’. I returned to my farm and found a board with the same writing,” he said. He said it took 10 farmers, with water tanks, more than two hours to douse the blaze. He said it would have taken about 40 people to hew the 1107 three-and-a-half-year-old trees across four hectares of his farm, and around 1200 macadamia nut trees had been burned and cut down over five hectares on a neighbour’s farm during the latest attacks. Arsonists also destroyed 4100 tons of sugar cane, two hectares of gum trees, and half a hectare of young gum trees. “They are trying to scare us and to hurt us financially. But what they don’t understand is it doesn’t hurt us only, it hurts the people who work for us, and 90% of them stay on the farms, so they are going to devastate families,” he said. He said farmers had lost millions of rand in costs incurred to grow the trees and sugar cane, and would have to wait two years to acquire fresh trees for planting due to nursery waiting lists. The farmer said the latest attack had left them “in shock” and they had laid seven charges of arson and malicious damage to property at Umhlali Police Station in the past two months. “We would just like the lawlessness to stop. We are obviously trying to better the lives of the people here and to work with the people in our surroundings,” he said. His neighbour said: “If this carries on much longer, we can’t live. It is heartbreaking to walk into an orchard and to see this.” Police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said a case of malicious damage to property had been opened. The farmer said several attempts to meet the local hunting community had been unsuccessful. Sam Mfeka, spokesperson for chief Siphiso Ngcobo, who is in charge of the neighbouring community, referred questions to the Agriculture and Rural Development Department. “We know there are problems happening but we cannot comment, although we don’t condone violence,” he said. Premier Sihle Zikalala’s spokesperson Lennox Mabaso said senior officials from the premier’s office had been requested to work with the Department of Community Safety and Liaison to get to the bottom of the matter. “The premier believes there needs to be peaceful coexistence with farmers and communities, and he condemns any acts of violence and criminality regardless of any concerns they may have,” he said. MEC for Economic Development Nomusa Dube-Ncube said the economic council would be visiting communities to stabilise all levels of the economy, including agriculture. The Mercury