Durban - SOUTH Coast residents should brace themselves for more dry taps as all water services in Ugu District Municipality have been disrupted. The municipality said their largest system that supplied several areas in the district, the St Helen’s Rock extraction point, was completely empty. Municipal spokesperson France Zama said they were faced with the huge task demand as they have to of supplying water through tankers, while their storage dams had also dried up and unable to sustain the demand. This had left a number of communities and businesses in Hibberdene, Woodgrange on Sea, Ramsgate South, Harding and Port Shepstone without running water for three weeks. Zama attributed the crisis to a lack of water sources, collapsing infrastructure and limited funding. He said the situation was exacerbated by the fact that the municipality did not have money, due to the non-payment by residents for services. Zama said that since March this year, revenue collection had dropped significantly because most people were hard-pressed struggling financially. “Per month, our projections have been around R40 million in revenue collection, but this has dropped to less than R14 million now. As much as the provincial and national government are trying to intervene, at this point it is becoming unbearable. “We could normally also implement a credit control policy to switch off water for those who did not pay, but we can’t due to the Covid-19 regulations. We have a community that has decided not to pay,” said Zama. He added that uMuziwabantu Local Municipality had been declared a disaster area due to the drought. “We are transporting water to those areas and our tankers are travelling more than 120km every day. Our water system is collapsing each and every day because it’s old. As much as we have started with the process of upgrading the system, the increasing demand and development around the district are putting more strain on the system,” he said. Zama said that three weeks ago they had to shut down the plant after high tides pushed seawater into Umzimkhulu River, and into the St Helen’s Rock extraction point. “When we closed the plant, it affected a lot of communities and our system also collapsed as our reserve dams also ran out of water. Currently, our system is still recovering, however most of the areas are indeed without water,” said Zama. Earlier this year, the districts received a budget of R2.7 million to upgrade the infrastructure, however the process had not yet started. Zama said the delay was due to government processes. He said the service provider, however, had been awarded the contract but they still had to wait for 14 days to allow people to lodge any objections. “In the next few days, we will report when the service provider will be on site. Its a matter of urgency as we need to upgrade that wall to ensure that water from the sea does not get to our arbitration point,” he said. Rishigen Viranna DA MPL for Ugu South constituency said they would closely monitoring  the construction process. Viranna said for the third time in five years, residents had to endure salt water and water outages. The Mercury