Durban - SEVERAL Durban schools crippled by Covid-19 are still without much-needed substitute teachers despite the return of all grades to class about two weeks ago. This has led to a severe shortage of teachers as many have been booked off because of underlying health conditions. A sample of about 23 schools in the Phoenix circuit area have stated that they are in desperate need of about 100 substitute teachers to cope with the increasing workload. One high school allegedly needs 12 teachers. It was revealed recently that about 6000 teachers might not return to class because of co-morbidities that place them in danger should they contract Covid-19. An official aware of the situation said the 23 schools were just the tip of the iceberg and many more schools were struggling. “One high school needs 12 teachers; just imagine how many other schools out there require substitute teachers. “The department is telling principals that they can apply for substitute teachers only for Grade12. The Grade12 classes will be over as soon as the exams start in October. “This circuit has about 200 schools and the 23 is basically 10% of the school population and all have teacher shortages. You can just imagine how bad the issue is,” said the official Another official said one school was missing five teachers, three of them taught Grade 12 and one is a language educator for the whole school. “At the moment, every teacher is assisting where they can. The department has said it has no money for substitute teachers,” said the official. National Teachers Union president Allen Thompson said substitute teachers had not been employed and many schools had been left to fend for themselves. Thompson said additional teachers were needed to help schools adhere to the required social-distancing protocols. “The department has not employed these teachers; they said they do not have the money and are still waiting for funds from the National Treasury. “The department hides behind the fact that schools are rotating classes. That is not an excuse as some schools are huge and two grades consume the entire staff and class complement, leaving other grades without classes or teachers. “Another issue nobody is paying attention to is that some teachers are now being made to teach subjects they were not trained in (and) that they have never taught. They are overstretched and that is why we are seeing instances where some teachers are starting to put in sick notes,” said Thompson. Scelo Bhengu, of the Educators Union of South Africa, said they had been receiving shocking reports from different parts of the country. “We have received reports that substitute teachers in Mpumalanga who have been working since June have been told to stop working because there is no money. “There are incidents in eThekwini where teachers are complaining that some principals are demanding they come back to work despite being at risk and are demanding they reveal their health conditions,” he claimed. Education MEC Kwazi Mshengu said the process of finalising the deployment of substitute teachers would be completed this weekend. “We have deployed about 1300 substitute teachers across the province, but there are some schools where we have agreed that we will not deploy substitute teachers. For instance, there are teachers that qualify for concessions according to the agreement, but have chosen to remain part of the system. These teachers would come to the school for their lesson, and once that was done they would go home and complete the rest of their work there.” The Mercury