Durban - Chatsworth beauty and Miss South Africa finalist Karishma Ramdev says she is happy to be back home with her family after spending months apart due to Covid-19 restrictions. The 25-year-old doctor, who is based in Johannesburg works at the Charlotte Maxeke Academic Hospital. Ramdev said that adage that ‘home is where the heart is’ could not be more accurate because her family is her home. “We have been apart for such a long time due to the Covid-19 travel restrictions and I truly missed spending time with them despite the regular phone and video calls.” Ramdev, who will be competing against nine contestants for the Miss South Africa crown on October 24, said she really enjoyed relaxing and being taken care of by her mom. “My mom pulls out all the stops when I'm here and cooks every single one of my favourite foods.” She said Covid-19 had changed the pageant in many ways. “The Miss SA team has truly been so innovative and on the ball, as they put to action the most incredible ideas whilst still adhering to COVID regulations at all times.” Describing the road to becoming a finalist, Ramdev said it has been the most incredible journey. “I didn't have expectations coming into Miss SA 2020 and I am so glad for that because it's been greater than my wildest imagination.” Ramdev said she is grateful and humbled to have been given this opportunity. She said one of her highest moments was having lunch with one of her role models Rolene Strauss and Amy Kleinhans. The doctor said she has been working on being kinder to her body and not allowing herself to measure against a fixed standard of beauty and health. “It is so unrealistic and I find many young girls and women doing the same. Ladies, we need to love our bodies as it's the only one we've got! "I think it’s so important to not compare yourself with anyone because we are all at different points of life and no two journeys are the same. As someone with an A type personality I grew up wanting to be the best at everything and in many senses that is flawed. Life is subjective, so don’t let society define you. You define yourself and look in the mirror and tell yourself that you are worthy, you are loved and you are imperfectly perfect. “I am a work in progress, and the truth is I always will be, and that's okay as long as I'm the best version of myself,” said Ramdev. She added that gender-based violence was an issued that needed to be dealt with. "There are quite a few things that still need to change and that we as women are continuously working on which is the issue of gender based violence especially with women as victims. Our country and the world are rife with it and it’s an issue that doesn’t seem to decrease no matter the amount of protest. "I feel that we need to start with educating our young boys, our sons and our brothers on the importance of gender equality and respecting women instead of sexualizing them. It’s no easy fix but every small and big effort counts!" Mercury