Durban - MSUNDUZI Municipality officials have been accused of abusing overtime pay by allegedly claiming millions of rand while the municipality was operating with skeleton staff due to the national lockdown. The officials are accused of claiming about R10 million in overtime pay between April and August. The spending has not been broken down as to which unit accumulated the most overtime, but the spending is described as part of Covid-19-related costs. Abuse of overtime was identified by the audit committee as one of the major challenges facing the municipality. The committee said the issue was worsened by the lack of sufficient internal controls and greed. Councillors in the municipality demanded a breakdown of how the overtime pay was accumulated. DA councillor Sibongiseni Majola said the situation painted a picture of corruption. “We have asked the managers how the officials generated about R10m worth of overtime, what we were doing when the country was under a national lockdown, these are officials who are already employed to work eight hours a day,” Majola said. “These revelations mean that we cannot exclude Msunduzi Municipality from all the institutions implicated in the allegations of corruption. We have engaged the municipal chief financial officer and she has said she will be engaging with the unit managers to get answers,” he said. ACDP councillor Rienus Niemand said abuse of overtime was a going concern that the management was failing to address. “The abuse of overtime has been the subject of internal audit, the audit committee and indeed the auditor-general’s report. These reports, year after year and specifically in today’s audit committee report, clearly spell out the abuse of overtime being the result of poor management,” he said. He said the abuse of overtime was almost endemic throughout government, and that the escalation of corruption during the lockdown was a crime against humanity. “Millions of people have lost their jobs, businesses have closed down and the economy is in a tailspin. “The ACDP condemns any abuse and calls on the municipal manager and the administrator to thoroughly investigate the overtime claims and prosecute without fear or favour where required. We need to rid ourselves of the scourge of corruption, no matter what form it takes,” he said. The municipality did not respond to requests for comment sent last week and ignored reminders yesterday.