It’s a decision that sits heavy on every parent’s mind: Should I send my child back to school? Fortunately, with a world of information at your fingertips, coming to the right decision shouldn’t be difficult. If you’ve made up your mind to keep your little one at home for the remainder of the year, BrightSparkz Tutors breaks things down into digestible pieces to help you navigate the world of homeschooling. Firstly, you'll need to register with the Department of Education (unless your child is continuing to learn online using the platforms provided by their school). If your child is choosing to do online learning from home, they need to do so with your support. Reasons for homeschooling and options available to you You can choose not to send your child back to school during the national state of emergency for these reasons: Exemption: Reasons 1-4 If your reason for wanting to keep your child at home is one of the first four reasons listed above, you’ll need to apply for a full or partial exemption. To do this, you’ll need to ask your child’s school to apply to the Head of Department. What does this entail? Online learning: Reason 5 If you have decided not to send your child back to school for reason 5, you don’t need to do anything. You don’t need to apply for an exemption, and your child can continue to learn online if their school provides this option. You will be responsible for ensuring that your child puts in the work and submits any assignments on time. What are your responsibilities? As your child is still an enrolled learner of the school and receives regular input and support from their teachers, you will need to continue paying school fees. You are also responsible for: Homeschooling: Reason 6 If you have decided not to send your child back to school for reason 6, you’ll need to register your child with a homeschool organisation by applying electronically. You will need to provide: The last step after your application is a home visit with an official to verify your information, provide guidance and complete the final forms. You can find more information on homeschooling here.