Durban - AUDITOR-general Kimi Makwetu described his damning audit indicators of potential rampant fraud and abuse of the government’s multibillion-rand Covid-19 relief stimulus as “frightening findings” that need to be “followed up very quickly”. Makwetu was addressing the media at the launch of his “First Special Report” on the financial management of the government’s Covid-19 initiatives yesterday. He said the government’s R500billion fiscal relief package, which has been funded by reprioritising the 2020/21 Budget and securing loans to respond to the Covid-19 pandemic, had “landed in a weak control environment”. His office undertook the real-time audit of 16 key Covid-19 initiatives and the management of R145bn in funds at the request of President Cyril Ramaphosa. The report highlights: Suspected fraud Overpricing Double-dipping Poor quality of goods provided and service delivery delays across initiatives. It is the first in a series of reports, covering R68.9bn (47%) of the R145bn spent as at July 31, 2020. “Emergency responses and quick actions are required to save lives and livelihoods, but the easing of controls and the streamlining of processes and procedures to respond to the crisis expose the government to the risks of the misuse or abuse of public resources,” Makwetu said. He said processes, criteria, needs and controls had not been well considered and “in the haste of implementation, mistakes were made and opportunities created for abuse”, and the government’s information technology systems had not been agile enough to respond. He said there also appeared to be attempts to delay and thwart the audit. “The lack of validation, integration and sharing of data across government platforms resulted in people - including government officials - receiving benefits and grants they were not entitled to. Some applicants could have been unfairly rejected as a result of outdated information on which assessment for eligibility was based,” he said. Based on what was audited to date, Makwetu found: Clear signs of overpricing Unfair processes Potential fraud and supply chain management legislation being sidestepped. In addition, delays in the delivery of personal protective equipment (PPE) and quality concerns could have been avoided through better planning and management of suppliers, he said. Record-keeping: Makwetu noted that poor record-keeping was a common feature across many initiatives, which meant auditees did not always have updated or reliable information on goods and services delivered, which made it difficult to completely audit them. “We are concerned about the indicators of high risk of fraud and abuse we observed - not only in the areas that we were able to audit, but also where information for auditing was not forthcoming, which could be a deliberate tactic to frustrate our audit efforts. “This report can serve as a guide for the agencies that have been tasked by the president to investigate allegations of abuse of the Covid-19 funds of the main areas of risk they can focus on. “The list of cases pointing to the high risk of fraud will be handed to the multi-agency fusion centre for their swift follow-up and action,” Makwetu said. “There are a number of frightening findings that need to be followed up very quickly,” he said. Some of the key findings highlighted in the report included: Temporary Employee Relief Scheme: A new system implemented for TERS incorrectly calculated the benefits for the first lockdown period (March27 to April 30) by not taking into account the portion of salary paid by employers, resulting in significant overpayments. A high number of payments were flagged that require investigation, including those to people who are below the legal age of employment, deceased, working in government, receiving social grants, or students funded by the National Student Financial Aid Scheme. R350 Social Relief of Distress Grant: There is a risk that this is being paid to people who are not in distress. Data analytics flagged payments to over 30000 beneficiaries that required further investigation, such as payments to beneficiaries employed in government or receiving other social grants, government pension, UIF payments and benefits from other relief funds. Emergency supply of water: The water supply initiative is behind schedule - the planned installation date for tanks across 3401 informal settlements was the first week of May but by July 31, only 69% had been installed. The Department of Water Affairs and Sanitation could not provide a reliable list of all water tanks delivered and their location, which made it difficult to audit whether tanks paid for had been received. In some instances, Rand Water did not comply with procurement processes to appoint suppliers. Food parcels: By May 11, when this initiative ended, 146936 food parcels had been distributed. The process could have been significantly cheaper had Sassa used existing non-profit organisations utilised by the Department of Social Development instead of appointing service providers. Distribution controls were not always effective, leading to delays, damaged and poorly packaged food parcels and beneficiaries receiving more than their entitlement. Industrial Development Corporation R2.5bn loans: No loans in respect of debt relief had been approved by July 15 as businesses did not comply with the qualifying criteria. Tourism Relief Fund: A tourism relief fund of R200million was made available by the Department of Tourism to support qualifying small, micro and medium enterprises in the tourism and hospitality sector. Some 4000 applications had been approved to receive a R50000 relief payment and 3994 applicants had been paid. The Department of Sports, Arts and Culture R235m relief fund: The progress of distributing the funds has been slow, with large numbers of applications by artists, athletes and technical personnel originally rejected and now being re-evaluated. Some R39m had been paid by July3. Quarantine sites: In total, 6123 quarantine sites were initially targeted but by July 31, only 510 sites had been identified by the Department of Public Works and only 192 had been activated for use by the Department of Health. Demand for sites is low, so the original target will not be met. The audit identified control weaknesses, overpayments, money spent on sites not yet activated and state-owned properties upgraded for use as quarantine sites not being used. Field hospitals: R4.8bn was made available for field hospitals and 66 projects were identified nationally, but by June 30, only 18 had been completed. The audit of procurement processes only recently commenced as a result of delays in the provision of information and documentation requested. However, the audit teams have already identified non-compliance with legislation. Procurement of PPE: The audit focused on the health and education sectors and is in different stages of completion as it has been plagued by delays, with audit teams not able to obtain all information needed. The team found non-compliance with PPE procurement processes. PPE for education: There are delays in the delivery of PPE and some schools did not receive sufficient masks and face shields for pupils and teachers. Most affected schools had to use their own funds, leaving schools that are in financial difficulty in a vulnerable position. The problem with the quality of PPE purchased was evident at a few schools, where masks provided were not to specifications and were often one-size-fits-all, whether for a child or an adult. PPE for the health sector: The purchasing of large volumes of PPE started in March but some health facilities experienced shortages during the pandemic, mainly due to significant delays in delivery. PPE is not always procured at market-related prices but at double and even five times the prescribed price, despite the National Treasury determining specifications and market-related prices for procurement. Similar instances were identified in the procurement of PPE in the education sector. Makwetu said the procurement of PPE remained a key focus of the audit and most of the outstanding audit work should be completed within the next two months. “There are clear indicators of fraudulent activities in the procurement processes, which will be further investigated and shared with the newly established fusion centre and other investigating agencies,” Makwetu said. He urged all role-players “to heed our call for a shift in thinking towards prevention”. “Designing and implementing controls that prevent fraud, errors and abuse are an investment that pays off when an institution is called upon to deal with a crisis, as we are now experiencing. “It is by far a better approach than having to deal with lengthy and costly investigations and a loss of resources and public confidence,” Makwetu said. The Mercury