Durban - THE funeral industry in the province is expected to come to a standstill today, following a call for a national shutdown of the sector, which will see undertaking and crematorium services suspended, funerals postponed and mortuaries potentially backlogged. For the Muslim community, the shutdown could be dire as the religion requires that burials occur within 24 hours. The Unification Task Team (UTT), which represents funeral directors nationally, has called for the “national shutdown” for three days, starting today. UTT convenor Thabiso Dladla said the organisation wanted the government to engage with it as a sector and recognise that it contributes around R4 billion to the national economy. He said UTT’s list of demands included calls to abolish the tender system in the funeral industry; the establishment of a Covid-19 relief fund for the sector; for funeral parlours to be paid directly by the Road Accident Fund; a certificate of competence should only be a requirement for a building of storage and management of human remains; the Department of Home Affairs must allow undertakers who don’t own a certificate of competence to write the designation number examinations; and grants must be provided to assist emerging small businesses. According to the UTT, from today there will be no removal of bodies from homes, state or private hospitals and no burials. “All funeral activities will be non-operational across the country, funeral undertaker offices must be closed and funeral industry workers must stay away from work,” said a statement from the UTT. Dladla said protests would take place at health facilities and those who did not want to participate had been asked to suspend their services. He distanced UTT from threatening voice notes circulating on social media. National Funeral Practitioners Association of South Africa president and UTT facilitator Muzi Hlengwa said they would do “everything in our power” to ensure that the protest goes ahead. He also thanked the Muslim Burial Society “for their understanding and support”. “We know that their culture calls for a same day burial but these are the sacrifices we all have to make.” Asked about the backing from the Muslim burial society, Hlengwa said they had a letter of support but did not provide further details. Islamic Burial Society (IBS) chairman Salim Kazi declined to comment on how Muslims would deal with burials during the strike. Undertakers Forum vice-chairman and former IBS chairman Ahmed Paruk said burials would “be a problem as we bury as quickly as possible, so we will have to wait and see what happens in the next three days. With the help of God, there will be no Muslim funerals in the next three days.” He said his organisation was negotiating with the UTT regarding Muslim burials. Durban funeral parlours expressed mixed reactions to the call to strike. Pinetown Funeral Services owner Christopher Moodley said his business would be closed in support of the strike. “We have some valid points that we are addressing with the government. I hope that they resolve this in a day or two because bereaved families will be suffering,” Moodley said. Doves Funeral and Insurance will be closed in KZN and Gauteng. Newlands City Funerals director Koushik Maharaj said the business would be closed in solidarity with the strike. “We had a meeting at the Clare Estate Crematorium, and it was decided that all undertakers and crematoriums will be closed.” Clare Estate Crematorium’s spokesperson Satish Duphelia confirmed that the crematorium would be closed from today and that management would meet this afternoon to make a decision regarding the way forward. Verulam Crematorium could not be reached for comment at the time of publication. However, Philani Gama, owner of Gama Classic funerals, said his business would be open. National Funeral Directors Association of Southern Africa (NFDASA) president Manesh Govender said his organisation agreed with some concerns that UTT raised but distanced itself from the strike. “Our main concern is that we are essential services and we cannot be stopped from assisting when someone passes away. We are going to try to work because they say it is a peaceful protest. But there are voice notes going around saying ‘we are not responsible if something happens’,” he said. Avbob general manager for funeral services Pieter van der Westhuizen said the firm had adopted a “wait-and-see” approach. “We are still considering our options. We will most probably follow the NFDASA stance but if they are picketing in front of our offices it might change,” he said. South African Funeral Practitioners Association president Libo Mnisi said the organisation would not be participating in the strike. He said UTT wanted to eliminate the requirement that undertakers have a certificate of competence from local government Health Departments before removing bodies from hospitals, which would pose a health risk to communities. “Our association is concerned that if people go on strike and a person dies at home, they say we are only going to do a removal three days after the strike. It’s a health hazard for people to stay with a body in the house for three days. “And we don’t like the violent language,” he said. “There are voice notes they sent to our people saying that if you are found driving a hearse on that day and you go and remove a body, they are going to burn your car.” A source who asked not to be named shared one of the voice notes with The Mercury, in which an unnamed man threatens dissenters. “We are closing down, it is a total shutdown. Those who dare go out and undermine us will meet their maker… We can’t have a situation where we are being undermined by our very own colleagues, as has happened in the past.” Health Department spokesperson Popo Maja said the department was aware that a group of funeral directors was “planning to shut down the collection of human remains from private and public health facilities”. “This is very concerning as this action may lead to undesired conditions and risks to public health,” Maja said. He said the department had engaged in several meetings with the sector since August and was willing to continue talks. “The department would like to emphasise the following: all funeral undertakers and mortuary premises used in connection with the preparation, storage and preservation of human remains must be in possession of a valid certificate of competence, issued by the relevant local authority. Environmental Health Practitioners are and will continue to conduct inspections in all funeral undertakers’ premises in the country, to ensure compliance to the regulations. Legal action will be taken against owners of premises found to be in contravention,” he said. “We call upon members of the public to report any illegal operations, to ensure the public can be protected from potential risks and the spread of communicable diseases, as a result of poor management of human remains.” EThekwini Municipality spokesperson Msawakhe Mayisela said the city recognised the right to strike but it would not condone lawlessness, such as the blocking of traffic and damage to property. The Mercury