Cape Town - Metro police officers conducted patrols in various areas which led to the arrest of nine suspects for crimes such as shoplifting, sexual assault, malicious damage to property and attempted house breaking, possession of drugs and possession of a stolen motor vehicle. Mayco Member for Safety and Security, JP Smith gave a breakdown of the week’s stating that officers impounded 80 vehicles and 136 cell phones and issued 64 570 fines for various transgressions. “On Saturday, 12 September 2020, officers patrolling Hanover Park was approached by a member of public informing them that his LDV was stolen. While patrolling the area, the complainant positively identified his vehicle which was parked at a garage with an unknown male person in the driver’s seat. “Upon interviewing the driver, he could not produce any documentation of ownership, which the owner produced to the officers. The 35-year-old suspect was arrested for possession of a stolen motor vehicle and detained at Philippi SAPS.” Last Thursday, officers operating the CCTV cameras in the control room spotted a male person, accompanied by three other individuals pushing a motorcycle in Cape Town. Smith said that the suspect was seen forcing open the delivery box and removing it from the motorcycle, along with a helmet, gloves and a black jacket. “SAPS and CCID were dispatched and directed to the suspects’ location, while the camera operator followed them via their camera foot print. “The suspects, aged between 18 and 32 were apprehended at the corner of Church and Long Street. They could not account for ownership of the motorcycle and were arrested for theft of a motorcycle and detained at Cape Town Central SAPS.” He said that the integrated approach by law enforcement agencies is important in crime prevention. “Our support to SAPS and other enforcement agencies shows to pay off with successful arrests. The next step towards successful prosecution is dependent on the criminal justice system. “We hope that the system will be more effective and that offenders will be brought to book and have their day in court. In recent weeks we have seen that criminals out on parole will not hesitate to commit the same or more serious offences,” added Smith. Cape Argus