Selvan Naidoo and Kiru Naidoo Durban - In 1858, Umzinto became the first place in Natal to employ Oriental labourers when a group of Malays and Chinese people arrived to work on the Reynolds Brothers sugar estate. The name Umzinto is derived from the Zulu “umenzi wezinto”, meaning the kraal or place of accomplishment. Two years later, in November of 1860, 30 indentured Indians were assigned to the Umzinto Sugar Company. The Reynolds Brothers owned the Equeefa Estate in Umzinto, employing a considerable number of indentured labourers to work on their sugar cane plantations. Over a period of almost 25 years, reports of assaults, desertions, deaths and suicides emanated from the Reynolds sugar estates in the district. Between July 1, 1892 and June 30, 1893, the Protector of Indian Immigrants, Louis Mason noted that eight Indians had committed suicide on Reynolds Brothers estates. The estates recorded the highest rate of recorded suicides among indentured Indians in colonial Natal. In 1881, The Mercury highlighted the poor accommodation of indentured labourers on sugar estates, reporting the death of two Indian children when a hut caught fire on the Equeefa Estate. “The wonder is that as there are so many coolie houses burnt down being made of such combustible material …” The 1906 Reynolds Inquiry found that barracks on the Reynolds estates were improperly built. There was no lining of the corrugated iron sheeting. As a result, there was no protection from heat or cold. Latrine facilities were crude or non-existent. Throughout the period of indenture, as official reports and commissions observed, the housing provided by employers was appalling. Generally that accommodation was comprised of wattle-and-daub hovels partitioned into small rooms. Cooking, washing and sanitation facilities were non-existent. The extracted report shown below further highlights the atrocious living conditions at the Equeefa estate: The Indian Immigrant Commission 1885-7. The Wragg Report. Chapter 5 1. In March 1884, the Medical Officer of the Umzinto circle forwarded to the Indian Immigration Trust Board his report for the year 1883. Therein were the words: “Many evils exist on the Equeefa Estate which are prejudicial to the health of Indians, but which I have failed to get altered.” He specified two of the evils thus: “a. The sanitary condition of the estate is bad, due to the refuse of the mill being run into a large reservoir which, when acted upon by the sun, ferments and gives forth noxious gases injurious to human health.” “b. The water supply, to part of the estate at least, seems bad. There are between 20 and 30 Indians suffering with bilharzia haematobia, which I believe is due to bad drinking water.” Years later, the abuse of Reynolds Brothers employees saw no end. The callousness of the employers is further reinforced by a heart-wrenching record of one employee named Parasuramen, Colonial Number 135558. “Parasuramen arrived to Natal in 1907 with his parents as an infant of 5 months, accompanied by 5-year-old sister. His father was indentured to the Reynolds estate, where his family lived in the barracks near the Old Esperanza Mill. “Parasuramen, like his father, was also indentured to the Reynolds estate, working for them for 53 years, retiring in 1972. Soon after he retired, Parasuramen’s wife had passed away from cancer in 1972. “When Parasuramen retired, he received a lump sum benefit of R106 from the company. “According to the company, they had no record of the 53 years of service and proceeded to pay him a sum of R2 for every year of service. “In addition to this sum of money, he was allowed to stay on in the ‘free’ company house.” Except for his old-age pension, Parasuramen had no other income and died penniless, struggling to eke out a comfortable existence. This year as we commemorate 160 years of indenture, the psychological impact of indenture must be told and retold to a wider South African audience to better understand our collective history. The financial and economic success of Reynolds Brothers (now Illovo Sugar) and other sugar barons in the growth of the sugar industry of KwaZulu-Natal came at the cost of horrific abuse of our forebears. The psychological traumas from indenture, through to the retirement benefit exploitation of our parents and grandparents in later years have yet to be atoned for, or even acknowledged. In this instance, Umzinto’s name, taken to mean “a place of accomplishment”, must act as a rallying point to heal the scars of our fractured past. Selvan Naidoo is the curator of the 1860 Heritage Centre and Kiru Naidoo serves on the advisory board of the Gandhi-Luthuli Documentation Centre at UKZN. Sources: The Indian Immigrant Commission 1885-7. The Wragg Report. Dorkin W, Untitled, ukzn.ac.za A sketch of colonial Umzinto and A sketch of colonial Umkomaas by Dr Duncan du Bois Typical barracks living conditions developed much later under the system of indenture.  |  1860 Heritage Centre The painful face of indenture that has been constantly evaded. To the colonialists, indentured labourers were regarded as a mere number to advance their economic prosperity.  |  1860 Heritage Centre Postcard, a bird's-eye view of Umkomaas, on the South Coast.  |  Newman Publishing Company, Cape Town A FAMILY of indentured ancestry in Umzinto, 1911. This family were slightly better off than most other indentured labourers. This was the family of a sidar (overseer or supervisor).  |  1860 Heritage Centre The atrocious living quarters of the indentured in the early years of indenture. Most of these were wattle-and-daub dwellings.  |  1860 Heritage Centre Umkomaas in the late 1800s. After completing their indentured labour contracts, some Indians set up homes in nearby Umkomaas. |  1860 Heritage Centre Indentured labourers working on a sugar cane plantation.  |  1860 Heritage Centre. Rural Umzinto became a place that saw the employment of many indentured labourers in the 1800s.  |  Internet source file He died penniless, trying to eke out a comfortable existence The Mercury