Durban - A R50 000 reward has been offered for information that could lead to the arrest of a man implicated in a drive-by shooting that claimed the lives of Bradley Hiralal and Bilquees Hussain, in uMhlanga Rocks, last month. 
 

 On Friday, police revealed that they were searching for Strini Chetty in connection with the shooting. 

 

 
  
  
   Police are searching for Strini "Micolan" Chetty who they believe could help in the investigation into a drive-by shooting in uMhlanga Rocks last month. Picture: Supplied
  
 

 

 KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson, Colonel Thembeka Mbele, said police were appealing for assistance from the community. She said Durban North SAPS detectives believed that Chetty, also known as Micolan, could be of assistance in their investigation. He is believed to have gone missing following the shooting.

 

 According to Mbele, on December 28, two 
 black BMW vehicles were travelling along Umhlanga Rocks Drive. 

 

 
  
  
   Bilquees Hussain
  
 
 
  
  
   Bradley Hiralal Pictures: Supplied
  
 

 

 "As the vehicles approached the traffic 
 lights at the intersection of uMhlanga Rocks Drive and Keynsham Drive, the driver of the rear BMW began to shoot at the occupants in the BMW that was in front. A female passenger in the vehicle sustained two gunshot wounds on the head and was pronounced dead at
  the scene by the attending paramedics. The male driver sustained two gunshots wounds to the head and one to the body. He was rushed to hospital where he succumbed to his injuries. Charges of murder were opened at the Durban North police station for investigation," she said. 

 
  
 
 
  
   Anyone who can assist the police with the investigation, is requested to contact Brigadier MM Khumalo on 082 556 8642/Captain R Balram on 083 783
  
  
   6007 or Crime Stop on 08600 10111. 
  
  
   
  
  
   Callers may remain anonymous and all information will be treated in the strictest of confidence. A reward of up to R50 000 is being offered for any information that would lead to the arrest of the suspect in this case.
  
  
    
  
 
 
  The Post previously reported that Chetty and Hussein had been in a relationship and were parents to two boys, aged 9 and 4. It was further reported that they had allegedly bought a house in Newlands West recently. 
 
 
  
 
 
  The Mercury