Britain’s royal family is hurt and disappointed by Prince Harry and his wife Meghan’s surprise announcement that they will step back from their senior roles and spend more time in North America, a royal source said.
Harry and Meghan’s decision to step away from royal duties sent shock waves through the royal family as neither Queen Elizabeth nor Prince Charles, heir to the British throne, had been consulted on the announcement, made on Instagram.

The queen, who has devoted her life to the public duty of monarchy since ascending the throne in 1952, and other senior members of the family, felt hurt and disappointed by the move, a royal source said.

 




  
   
    
     
     
      
     
    
   
    
   
    
     
      
       

       
      
     
    
   
    
    
      View this post on Instagram
    
   
    
   
     
      
      
     
    
     
      
     
    
     
      
      
     
    
    
   “After many months of reflection and internal discussions, we have chosen to make a transition this year in starting to carve out a progressive new role within this institution. We intend to step back as ‘senior’ members of the Royal Family and work to become financially independent, while continuing to fully support Her Majesty The Queen. It is with your encouragement, particularly over the last few years, that we feel prepared to make this adjustment. We now plan to balance our time between the United Kingdom and North America, continuing to honour our duty to The Queen, the Commonwealth, and our patronages. This geographic balance will enable us to raise our son with an appreciation for the royal tradition into which he was born, while also providing our family with the space to focus on the next chapter, including the launch of our new charitable entity. We look forward to sharing the full details of this exciting next step in due course, as we continue to collaborate with Her Majesty The Queen, The Prince of Wales, The Duke of Cambridge and all relevant parties. Until then, please accept our deepest thanks for your continued support.” - The Duke and Duchess of Sussex For more information, please visit sussexroyal.com (link in bio) Image © PA

A post shared by  The Duke and Duchess of Sussex (@sussexroyal) on Jan 8, 2020 at 10:33am PST


“We have chosen to make a transition this year in starting to carve out a progressive new role within this institution,” Harry and Meghan said in their statement.
“We intend to step back as ‘senior’ members of the royal family, and work to become financially independent.”
They said the decision was taken after months of reflection and discussion, and that they would split their time between the UK and North America to allow their family the space it needs.

Cast by the couple as an exciting next step, it was not immediately clear how they would become what royal biographers said was akin to being a “half royal” - and who would pay for their transatlantic lifestyles.
British tabloids said the announcement had left senior royals such as Prince Charles and Harry’s brother, Prince William, incandescent with rage.
Buckingham Palace said discussions with Harry and Meghan were at an early stage and that such complicated issues took time to work out. 

“MEGXIT” read The Sun’s front page headline. The Daily Mail said Queen Elizabeth was furious about the move.
While the manner in which Harry and Meghan have tried to exit the spotlight cast on the world’s most famous family drew criticism, Prince Charles has long sought a slimmer and leaner royal family.
The haste of their decision, though, raises questions for a family which had, in Elizabeth’s words, a “quite bumpy” year.

Meghan could return to acting in the US, though it is unclear how that would be viewed by the palace. “Perhaps she’d have to be careful about what roles she’d do because she is a member of the royal family, so she couldn’t do too many racy sex scenes for instance,” said royal biographer Penny Junor. 
Reuters