The recent statements by President Ramaphosa regarding the rot in the various municipalities is nothing more than hot air, its like watching an ice cube melt in the sun. It is virtually impossible to stop this rot other than firing with immediate effect all those involved in corruption and those who are delinquent employees. This would never be allowed to happen by those involved; they would, as seen before, band together and rather get the president fired than loose their sources of income. The problem is that all those deployed by the ANC into all these local authorities i.e. municipalities have proved to be beyond any reasonable doubt either illiterate or have very little education to fulfil what is required in professionally carrying out the duties of their respective portfolios. This is also borne out by the number of ANC municipalities that have failed audits in the past 20 odd years. In fact it has become a joke, look at all the various municipalities. The end result of all this, is that it has allowed for these individuals to suddenly live a life of luxury while draining the coffers of the various municipalities, leaving them bankrupt and unable to render any critical services. It seems from past reports it has become common for these people to siphon off as much revenue as they can as though they were entitled to it – like a cultural thing of entitlement. Ramaphosa can talk all he wants to but it will be like water off a duck’s back,  he is definitely not going to stop this rot. Ironically he must have been aware of all this corruption while he was the deputy president under Zuma’s administration. Finally, having listened to the money flows regarding the Estina Dairy Farm and Transnet taking place at the Zondo Commission, this ANC government and its elite comrades have really looted the government coffers, it’s no wonder that this government is bankrupt, yet has wasted money on SAA knowing full well that they will not get any investors who wish to lose money in SAA. It does not take a rocket scientist to see where we are heading – down the same chute as Zimbabwe and other surround countries when we were at one stage a powerhouse in southern Africa. GLEN CHRISTIE, Durban North The views expressed herein are not necessarily those of Independent Media.