EDITORIAL It’s December and the time of year when South Africa starts to wind down for the holiday season. Aside from the focus on the 16 Days of Activism against gender-based violence (GBV), this is also the time when attention turns to road traffic and campaigns to limit road accidents, death and injury on the roads as people travel home to family or on holiday. Last year, between December 1 and mid-January, there were 1 390 fatal accidents reported, with 1 617 fatalities… the highest numbers being in KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng. This year the situation is complicated by the Covid-19 pandemic and concerns about the increase in infections being seen in certain parts of the country, especially the Western and Eastern Cape. By yesterday, South Africa had recorded more than 790 000 positive coronavirus cases – an increase of 2 000 in a day – with more than 21 500 deaths over the past eight months. Thirty percent of cases are in Gauteng, with 16% each in KZN, the Western and Eastern Cape, where Health Minister Zweli Mkhize paid a visit to Nelson Mandela Bay Metro to focus on case management and behavioural change that is needed to bring the surge in numbers under control. Covid-19 experts have warned that what has been seen in Nelson Mandela Bay should be a warning of what lies ahead as people start their travels across the country should they fail to adhere to the basics such as wearing a mask, sanitising and keeping physical distance. Aggravating all three challenges – GBV, road accidents and the spread of Covid-19 – is alcohol abuse, and among the calls being made are to once again limit the sale of alcohol and extend the curfew. While the Western Cape considers the legal implications of tighter localised restrictions, the National Coronavirus Command Council meets this week and there are widespread rumours that limitations may be on the cards if SA is to prevent the dreaded second wave. With so many deaths and such trauma caused in our lives by Covid19, one must wonder if it is too much to expect people to respect the simple steps they can take and adhere to the rules, just as one must wonder why motorists do not take greater care to prevent accidents on the road or men to prevent GBV at home and in their communities.