Another nun has succumbed to the Covid-19 cluster outbreak at the Daughters of St Francis convent in Port Shepstone. This brings the total number of deaths to nine, while 24 others have also been infected. The Mercury earlier reported that eight nuns between the ages of 75 and 88 had died in just more than a week. Archbishop William Slattery, who is the spokesperson for the Southern African Catholic Bishops’ Conference, confirmed on Monday that nine nuns had now passed away. Elmara Skhakhane, Leonissa Nzimande, Colleta Msomi, Anastasia Mthetwa, Amara Madlala, Edmunda Nkomo and Helen Cele, lost their battle against the virus. The other two nuns have not been named. He said the convent was an old age home for KZN nuns and that all of the sisters who passed away were over the age of 70. Slattery said he was advised not to go to the convent due to the high number of Covid-19 infections. “There are 24 sisters who are infected with the virus ... this wave of the virus is strong. It took them by storm,” he said. He said the outbreak happened suddenly and that there were constant missions coming and going. Once the virus got in, it spread, he said. “A few weeks ago, the sisters had flu for days, and when they contracted the virus, they thought the flu had returned,” said Slattery. Slattery said the nuns started dealing with the Covid-19 outbreak too late. “In 11 days, nine sisters have passed away,” he said. Both the Department of Health and an infectious diseases team had been to the convent, he said. “The Department of Health came last week and made recommendations. They haven’t been back since. Hopefully, they’ll come back (Tuesday),” said Slattery. Slattery said the situation was disastrous and sad because Covid-19 funerals are “lonely.” “These sisters have given their lives in service of others at schools and parishes across KZN, and for them to be buried in this quiet manner is not fitting,” said Slattery. He said the convent did have personal protective equipment and sanitiser stations. Slattery said that while they were doing their best to support and assist the nuns, the nature of the virus required people to stay away. “We are very upset, and all we can do is offer help and money. All we can do is stand by,” said Slattery. He added that one of the nuns at the convent was a nurse and she was doing her best to take care of the nuns and liaise with the Department of Health. Nkhensani Shibambu, the president of the Leadership Conference of Consecrated Life South Africa (LCCLSA), said they were shocked by the death of the sisters. Four nuns are being treated in a hospital, Shibambu said. In terms of support, Shibambu said the Department of Health had tested all the nuns for Covid-19. “They will bring assessors to inspect the premises and advice us about how we can live safely as sisters,” she said 