Durban - The second wave of Covid-19 that is sweeping the country has claimed the lives of nuns from the Daughters of Saint Francis in Port Shepstone, Marianhill Diocese, in just more than a  week. The Leadership Conference of Consecrated Life South Africa (LCCLSA) announced the deaths on Friday. LCCLSA president Nkhensani Shibambu said members of the organisation were shocked and saddened by the deaths of Elmara Skhakhane, Leonissa Nzimande, 78, Colleta Msomi, 78, Anastasia Mthetwa, 86, Amara Madlala, 75, Edmunda Nkomo, 80, and Helen Cele, 88. “At a time and season of advent hope, this certainly comes as a deep wound to the church, the congregation and the conference at large,” he said. Shibambu said the nuns had died within a period of just over a week, between December10 and 18, 2020. “Fifteen other sisters are said to be critically ill,” he said. He said their deaths were a reminder that the rate of Covid-19 infection had continued to increase and was devastating communities and society at large. “We send not only consolatory messages to the congregation of the Daughters of Saint Francis, but also urge all religious congregations and communities to be extra vigilant and cautious in light of the deadly and subtle second wave of the pandemic,” Shibambu said. Shibambu said no one was immune. “The least we can do is to continue adhering to the safety protocols of Covid-19 prevention and containment, especially as most people and communities gather for the celebration of the festive season and beyond. This comes as the KZN Research Innovation and Sequencing Platform (Krisp) announced the emergence and rapid spread of a mutation of the Sars-CoV-2 virus. Krisp said Sars-CoV-2 was found in 10 different health facilities in six KZN districts from October 15 to November 25. Minister of Health Zweli Mkhize announced two weeks ago that South Africa had entered a second wave of the virus as the number of reported Covid-19 cases had increased. As at December 19 KZN had recorded a total of 154 535 cases, an increase of more than 2 900 cases since the previous report. In June, Independent Online reported that five Catholic nuns from the Eastern Cape had died within a week. The nuns belonged to the Diocese of Mthatha. Three of the nuns were from Mthatha, and one was from Matatiele. The Mercury  