Durban - MSUNDUZI Municipality councillors who are provided with bodyguards may have to do without them next year unless there is proof that their lives are in danger. Councillors have until March next year to get a threat assessment on their lives conducted by the South African Police Service (SAPS) to show why they should be provided with protection. It has emerged that the municipality is spending millions of rands to provide bodyguards to councillors and officials even though no threat assessments were done to confirm that their lives were in danger. No assessments had been done in the past five years. The municipality is providing security to 19 councillors and four officials at a cost of R27 million per year.  There are about 54 security officials hired to provide the protection. A recent report by the administrator Scelo Duma revealed details of the extent of those being given protection as well as the cost. The spending on security by the municipality had initially been pegged at R100 million. This was revised down to look just at the security cost linked to protection detail. It revealed that with the exception of the mayor, Mzimkhulu Thebolla, the deputy mayor Manilal Inderjit and speaker Eunice Majola, who are entitled to protection as per position, there was no justification for the protection of the others.  It said  the affected councillors will  be notified by relevant officials that with effect from March 1,  2021 the municipality  will cease the provision of security unless there was a valid threat and risk assessment analysis from the South African Police Service (SAPS) . DA councillor Sibongiseni Majola said it was unacceptable that the council was spending so much money on bodyguards. “There is a circular that came from the national treasury that dictates how we should be appointing bodyguards, it said for the principal (mayor, deputy mayor and speaker), there should be 4 per shift, if that is the case, the council should only be paying for 12 bodyguards per shift  as the rest are irregular. “It is concerning that the last security threat assessment was done before this term of councillors even took over, threat assessments are not lifelong, they are reviewed. He added that there were some officials that had bodyguards when they held senior positions and when they were demoted they still kept the security despite no longer qualifying for them. Majola said the municipality should heed the advice from Duma and review the city’s policy that dictates the provision of security for councillors. “I believe that people should get protection when they get threats because of the jobs they do in the council not for any other matter, if I get into a dispute with my neighbour or my colleagues in my party over positions, the council should not be expected to provide me with protection,” he said. ACDP councillor Rienus Niemand said many of the councillors that have bodyguards should not have them. “These have not been sanctioned by the SAPS as the threat assessments were never done, the contracting of these bodyguards is illegal and the millions spent on them should go towards service delivery.” Msunduzi mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla said the issue of bodyguards was a sensitive one that should not be treated lightly as there were councillors who required protection. He said the council was however concerned about the cost and will be working to reduce it.