Durban - Residents and management of the John Palmer Residence for the Blind in Sherwood have made a plea for the eThekwini Municipality to fix a waste water problem on the property that poses a health hazard and might flood the building in heavy rain. Residents said the home had repeatedly complained to the municipality about the waste pipe leak which they believe is flowing into the property from an adjacent plot. They said they initially noticed the water flowing onto the premises early last month. The pool of water has also attracted mosquitoes which are plaguing residents and staff. It is unclear whether the water is sewage or grey water although the stench was unbearable when The Mercury visited the home this week. KwaZulu-Natal Society for the Blind general manager Bheki Jele said the facility manager noticed the problem on November 4. He said the leak was reported to the municipality on November 5 and officials arrived to inspect it the following day. However, he said since then no one had returned to repair it despite repeated complaints to the city. “We have engaged our plumbing service provider who advised the issue is beyond their scope and requested we contact the municipality. They came once and informed us the problem needs their big truck. We have been following up and were informed the truck that can assist is engaged in other assignments of the municipality,” Jele said. “The problem has further resulted in the facility having mosquitoes due to the dirty water. The unbearable smell is also causing a health risk for the residents who are already vulnerable.” Jele said the city needed to fix the problem “as it arises from their drainage”. EThekwini Municipality spokesperson Msawakhe Mayisela said the city was not aware of the problem, but a fault had now been logged. “The city would like to reiterate the issue of blocked manholes continues to be a problem, this is despite the speed that the city moves to attend to such blockages,” Mayisela said. “What is compounding our woes is that some members of the public continue to dispose of foreign objects into the system resulting in it becoming blocked,” he said. Jele added the home which is funded through donations and a small income was over-spending on running costs such as water, electricity, food for residents and staff wages. He said the home also needed assistance trimming the overgrown bush and trees on the property. Residents at the home, which accommodates about 30 people, said it was in need of donations of food, beds, crockery and pots. Mercury