Durban - Ethekwini mayor Mxolisi Kaunda has ordered City officials to stop settling frivolous lawsuits that it could defend in court. Kaunda said in cases where the City was being taken advantage of, officials should resist threats and tackle the matter in court. He said it was unacceptable that people intimidated the City into paying for work it never commissioned or in some cases it overpaid them when it settled claims. It was reported earlier this year that a contractor was claiming millions of rand from the City for building houses without the permission or knowledge of the council. The City is apparently locked in negotiations with the contractor. In another matter that was revealed at an exco meeting yesterday, the City had owed a service provider R8.8 million but had offered a settlement offer of R19m to the company. Further details of the matter were not divulged as the matter is sub judice. Kaunda said such matters were unacceptable and should stop. “We owed a service provider R8 million and we paid that service provider R10m more, how does that happen? That issue must be investigated,” he said. He said the City should also stop letting itself be bullied by contractors. “We are not a banana republic, let's not pay them, let's meet them in court. We cannot allow people to build with no job number. This must stop, if this has been a culture before, it must be rooted out, it's a bad culture. We should put systems in place to detect such things and shut them down,” he said. DA councillor Nicole Graham said it was ludicrous that the City was even talking to the contractors that had built houses without its knowledge. “It's completely absurd that this ever happened  and that the City is negotiating with these people. Either you have a contract with the municipality and letter of award, which is the authority to do the work, or you don't. “Undoubtedly there is some kind of politics involved, why would anyone embark on a project with no guarantee they will be paid is completely beyond me. How this situation arose is more than meets the eye in my opinion and certainly these people should not be paid. They had no authority to do the work,” she said. IFP councillor Mdu Nkosi said: “Where on earth have you heard of an instance where someone with money builds houses without permission and then turns around and demands that the council should pay for those houses. “I am sure that the City officials were involved in this, we need to deal with this or it will continue. People will just build houses and they will then expect the municipality to just pay. We need to know what is going to be done with those officials,” he said. The Mercury