The 2020 Al Ansaar Souk trade fair has been cancelled following the announcement of the second Covid-19 wave and rise in cases in KwaZulu-Natal. The annual fair, scheduled to run from December 24  to January 3, 2021, at the Durban Exhibition Centre, attracts hundreds of small businesses, and thousands of visitors from around the country. The Al Ansaar Foundation, which organises the fair each year to raise funds, said the organisation could not risk hosting it due to the rise of Covid-19 cases The foundation’s chairperson Ashfaq Dawood said the responsible decision was to cancel the Souk. “A decision that will come with serious financial constraints and challenges for the organisation, however, it was the right step to have made,” he said. Earlier this month, the Al Ansaar Foundation was relaunched at an event in Overport, and the new board of directors was introduced. Dawood  said the new Al Ansaar had a new face and was committed to transformation. Having been asked to be a part of the evolution process for Al Ansaar two years ago, Dawood was appointed chairperson two months ago. At the re-launch, Dawood said there was a serious misconception about what was wrong in the organisation. “Al Ansaar was not a mismanaged organisation; it was largely unmanaged,” he said. He further explained that before he got involved, the entire organisation was run by two active directors on a part-time basis. As a result, he said there were many opportunities for abuse, and on his appointment, his first task was to create an organisational board. “A single person cannot transform without resources. You are only as good as the people around you, and in business, you need to ensure that you have the right skills, a team that is profitable and workable,” said Dawood. The new board includes Dawood as chairperson, finance director Faheem Patel, marketing director Asif Essa, education director Hafiz Wadi, Ameer of Radio Al Ansaar, Shabir Basha and Ameer of Foundation Irfaan Bux. Mahomed Joosab will retain his position as a non-executive director as well as advocate AB Mahomed.