Durban - Acting eThekwini municipal manager Sipho Cele says the City is monitoring about 150 employees that are the highest earners of overtime as part of its efforts to contain the ballooning cost that has climbed to R1.2 billion. The City is also monitoring different units that were ranked among the top 10 in claiming overtime. Cele and other city officials were reporting back to the exco members yesterday on the actions being taken to correct several issues that were raised in a report by City’s Audit Committee last week. These included concerns about the abuse of overtime. The committee had raised concerns that some individuals had claimed hundreds of hours in overtime pay, and in some cases, they had earned three times their salaries from overtime.  The committee said despite efforts, including the setting up of a committee to monitor overtime spending, the problem persisted. They said for the 2019/20 financial year, overtime pay had increased by a R100 million, from R1.1 billion the previous year to R1.2 billion. Cele said there were challenges but the City had identified 10 units and 150 staff members that were the highest earners of overtime. He said the issue of Metro police overtime was not easy to address due to the complex nature of their work: “They are sometimes forced to work overtime as they had to work outside their hours to deal with sporadic protests that spring up all over the city on a regular basis.” He said units like water and sanitation sometimes had to work overtime because the city’s infrastructure was old and therefore prone to failures. Cele said as part of reining in the overtime cost, they were in the process of filling vacancies in the different units. Deputy City manager from Corporate and Human Resource Kim Makhathini said the Human Resource unit assisted the different units to try to contain overtime costs. She said part of the way to contain it was for the unit to adhere to the law and only allow people to work the overtime hours that is allowed by the law. Workers are generally allowed to work 40 hours a week of overtime. DA councillor Thabani Mthethwa said the response provided on the issue by management had been unsatisfactory. He said, as councillors, they had expected a detailed response on which units were behind the overtime expenditure would be provided during the meeting. DA caucus leader Nicole Graham said the abuse of overtime should be a dismissable offence. “I received (information) from someone from Metro unit that a captain there had pleaded guilty of the abuse of overtime and was sanctioned with 10 days without pay.” She said such a sanction when the concerned official had admitted the offence would not act as a deterrent for those that were involved in the abuse of overtime. Mayor Mxolisi Kaunda said the city officials should give a detailed breakdown on the different units and their overtime costs. “Metro Police, when it was envisioned, the number (of officers) we have there are not the numbers that we had requested to cover the whole city, but that is not an excuse (for overtime) abuse.” The Post