While I sometimes marvel at the complexities of humanity, I find it hard to comprehend the raw magnetic appeal that politicians have on the unwashed masses and the iconoclastic fervour with which congregants embrace their pastors. In politics, we have seen it with all and sundry. Jacob Zuma, despite his rape and corruption charges, had his regular bus loads picketing outside the court. We saw it again more recently with Ace Magashule and we see it all the time with Julius Malema. It's the grand delusion of the weak-filled, the fearful; the sheep of the world who have no strength to lead but only be led. It inevitably leads to their slaughter . We see it with foreign pastors who go by a plethora of appellations from pastor to bishop to reverend to prophet, with one Prophet Shepherd Bushuri making headlines for escaping from South Africa. The once-exalted shepherd who came to the promised land of milk and honey has deserted his anguished flock, all in the name of greed and self-aggrandisement. Society needs to be guarded against the self-proclaimed disciples of God with an almost God-like invincibility,  as if they alone had seen heaven and had been charged with the mission of not simply spreading God's word but enforcing it. I am a Christian and enjoy regular television dates with Creflo Dollar and TD Jakes which I find spiritually uplifting and a lesson each time. These are messengers of God, chosen to spread the gospel and good word. Despite the ectoplasm that shrouds them and a whole magic show of tricks, they are human. They are not God and should not be worshipped. If you cut their finger, blood will flow out, not liquid gold. Throughout history, the greatest crimes against humanity have been those carried out in the name of God, fanatisising religious values to justify unspeakable acts of evil against civilisation. There are too many cheap seats in the world today, too many actors wearing masks and roaring like lions, too many paper tigers. They are plangent troubadours spewing dithyrambic doggerel and a burning supernovea of biblical quotes that mesmerises the masses to drink petrol and eat snakes. Another sulphurous predator is Timothy Omotoso who is awaiting his fate in a Port Elizabeth prison. He faces the same charges as Bushuri – fraud, human trafficking and rape. If released on bail, he will surely make a dash for freedom, like Bushuri. All their evasive actions must surely seem like a God-given modus operandi. There is something about Bushuri's methodical gait and prissy manner that provokes dislike. Whilst he is a brilliant orator with that unpinnable je ne sais quoi and capable of hypnotising his audience with great charm, he is also vain, self-centred and the focus of his own world. Meanwhile, gargoyle Omotoso will spend another Christmas silent night in prison with only his leg shackles and handcuffs to play Jingle Bells. The courts must seek to crucify both preachers. KEVIN GOVENDER, Shallcross The views expressed herein are not necessarily those of Independent Media.