So now it’s the Durban municipal manager’s wife who is implicated for a trifling R18 000 (it beats me with my weak maths and ‘shopkeeper’ mentality; How do you calculate the amount to bribe?). According to the charges, this is allegedly from a service provider for a kitchen (also R18 000 is a bit on the low side both for a ‘’bribe’ and kitchen). Sadly, for the oppression and exploitation  of the previous ‘settlers’, many left legacies that are of benefit today. Samuel Crookes Sugar, CG Smith, Hullett, Tongaat, NCT Timber, Bell equipment, Rainbow Chicken,  Wessels and Toyota to name but a few in KZN. For all the BEE billionaires and tenderpreneurs, it will be interesting to see their legacies-lifestyle or business. Many clamour for the ‘land’. I have yet to see anyone clamour for farms in the former homelands which was probably the largest redistribution of land undertaken. The agricultural potential of the former Transkei is mind-boggling. A question that arises is: on the basis of all these facts and charges (irrespective of a conviction) should the Mayor, Deputy Mayor, Exco and ANC not take charge and offer some leadership? Apartheid was a massive duplication and preferential allocation of resources. It seems today the government pays for suspended employees salaries and benefits and then has to get acting appointments to fill in their posts. To make matters worse, in the so-called richer areas, you have various UIP bodies conducting verge cutting, security at an added expense to the exorbitant rates being charged. In essence, the municipality has failed in these areas. In all this, one has to realise for how long is the ruling party going to drag its feet with the overwhelming evidence. Even the Zondo commission is now becoming like the soap opera– just as the sand in the hour glass; so are days of the Zondo commission. South Africa shows how superb managers are sidelined and good departments are brought to a standstill by the selfish, self-centred and arrogant approach of a few. This waste has to stop. Muhammad Omar, Durban North The views expressed herein are not necessarily those of Independent Media.