Durban - Absenteeism, exam cheating, lack of data and equipment and excessive workloads were some of the challenges raised by university lecturers and students regarding online teaching and learning. Due to the Covid-19 pandemic, tertiary institutions had to adopt to remote teaching and learning methods in order to ensure that students can complete the academic year. Online learning was introduced in June 2020, following the announcement by Minister of Higher Education, Science and Technology, Blade Nzimande that higher education institutions could resume work under lockdown level 3. While in-person lectures have resumed for some subjects at institutions under lockdown level 1, for a large majority of subjects, lectures are still being conducted online. The Mercury this week spoke to lecturers and students from tertiary institutions in KwaZulu-Natal, on condition of anonymity as they feared reprisals, on the challenges they faced with online teaching and learning. One lecturer said remote learning did have advantages as allowed for flexibility with students being able to access lessons at any given time. According to the lecturer,  they hold virtual lectures via online platforms such as Zoom or Teams and thereafter the recorded lessons, notes, and presentation slides are uploaded on an online system. However, he said the method did also have challenges as students could discuss tests and assessments and cheat. He said he was aware that students take test questions or assessment scenarios and discuss them among each other through WhatsApp groups. “They basically turn a test or that assessment into a group discussion. “We also do give students more than one attempt (at an assessment or test) as some complain about network connectivity. “They take advantage of that, and they copy each other’s work and help each other,” he said. According to the lecturer, absenteeism for virtual lectures was high. He said often, when he logs onto a platform to start a lecture, he finds that almost 80% of the students are absent. The lecturer added that working hours had also increased as they had to respond to emails or messages from students even on weekends and after hours. “There is literally no cut off time as you constantly have to respond to students’ queries. We work all the time even after hours. “It's too much,” added the lecturer. Another lecturer said when online learning started, the attendance was very poor as most students had issues such as connection, data, and laptops. The lecturer said attendance had marginally improved when students were allowed to return to campus to access library and computers labs and to student residences. He said one of the reasons that students skipped lectures was due to their work load. “Some students have about 3 or 4 submissions in one week, and they choose not to come to class as they try to finish up their work,” said the lecturer. Another problem raised was that lecturers were unable to have proper discussions with students. “We only pass information, and we can't engage to check if everyone is on the same page or not. “Only one or two students ask questions on the live chat but the rest don't engage,” added the lecturer. One of the students said since they started online learning, the attendance was poor, especially classes scheduled after midday. “When you attend, you only find that there are about 15 people in a class of 100 students. “You also get bored and leave because you can't even engage with the classmates and lecturer. “When you do engage, it just gets chaotic,” said a student. He also admitted that the students made use of WhatsApp groups to discuss assessments. Another student said students were working together on assessments but denied that it was cheating. “We share answers and information. “It is not cheating, we are just working together collaboratively towards academic enrichment.” One of the students said that there were a number of students who are yet to receive their data and laptops, while some were left behind while experiencing connection issues. “You will finish your daily data and be left with the night data only, on that, you will have to wake up at night to download documents and recordings. “Some have received data, however, they do not have laptops since NSFAS (National Student Financial Aid Scheme) has yet to provide any.” Alan Khan, senior director of Corporate Affairs at the Durban University of Technology said online learning had provided some challenges as some students still did not have access to devices and data. “We have 6% of students who are not engaging in any form of teaching and learning. “Faculties developed catch-up plans to support this group of students,” he said. He said that the Higher Education and Training department had said it would provide NSFAS-funded students with devices but this has not yet happened. Last week Nzimande said the laptops would now be distributed in the new academic year in March after delays in the procurement processes. Regarding cheating, Khan said the university had a system in place for dealing with students who cheat and warned that a student who was caught cheating would face disciplinary action. University of KwaZulu-Natal’s acting executive director for Corporate Relations said all the institution’s students had access to online learning. “Executive management identified those students that were experiencing challenges to online learning. “Those students were allowed to return to campus under strict conditions,” said Zondo. She said cheating and sharing of answers among students  had not been widely reported to the institution. Ahmed Bawa, chief executive at Universities South Africa (USAf) said the shift to online learning happened unexpectedly and also with great uncertainty. However, Bawa said many of the universities ensured that they developed a set of policies for proper and ethical assessments, which did not impact negatively on the quality of education. “Universities invested huge funds in software which would prevent students from cheating. “Universities must introduce new ways of setting up tests and assessments,” he said, Bawa also raised concerns about lecturer burnout and said  new rules needed to be put in place to protect the lecturers. “We are very worried and have deep concerns about staff burnout. “It has been a new experience and what they found is that they spend much more time on courses than they would when teaching on campuses,” said Bawa. Bawa suggested that guidelines needed to be implemented to regulate the interaction between students with lecturers. Mercury