Durban - 
 University of KwaZulu-Natal’s (UKZN’s) high impact researcher, Dr Veron Ramsuran, was 
 awarded the prestigious UKZN Vice-
 Chancellor’s annual award valued at R150 000. 

 

 The award is presented to a pre-eminent 
 researcher at UKZN in recognition of their outstanding research achievements as well as the 
 international reputation they’ve acquired within their respective discipline.

 

 Ramsuran graduated with a PhD from UKZN where he examined host factors associated 
 with the HIV disease. He spent almost 70% of his PhD in two international laboratories, 
 including the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center and The University of Texas Health 
 Science Center at San Antonio. 

 

 After completion of his PhD, he was recruited to join the 
 Ragon Institute of Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH), Massachusetts Institute of 
 Technology (MIT) and Harvard as a postdoctoral research fellow. After completing five years in 
 these institutes, Ramsuran returned to South Africa and to UKZN.

 

 He is now a UK Royal 
 Society Future Leader African Independent Research (FLAIR) Fellow; Group Leader at 
 KwaZulu-Natal Research Innovation and Sequencing Platform (KRISP); Associate Scientist 
 at Centre for the AIDS Programme of Research in South Africa (CAPRISA); and a guest 
 Researcher at the National Cancer Institute at the National Institute of Health (NIH). He has 
 also been the recipient of numerous honours and awards and serves as an editor on two 
 leading international immunology journals.

 

 His work is on examining the effect Host Genetics play on the HIV and TB disease. He has a 
 special interest in examining the Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) genes, the epicentre of 
 disease associations across the human genome, as determined by genome wide 
 association studies. His recent work examines the effect of differential HLA expression levels 
 on HIV and TB disease. He is also interested in factors contributing to the differential HLA

 expression. 

 

 Ramsuran also recently found out that he has been awarded the Future Leader of African 
 Independent Research (FLAIR) Collaboration award. This he shares with UKZN’s honorary 
 scientist at Oxford University, Professor Philip Goulder. The € 50 000 UK Royal Society 
 award will fund their joint study that aims to find out why female babies have a two-three-fold 
 increased risk of acquiring HIV when compared to male infants. 

 

 The researchers believe an 
 epigenetic mechanism (changes not located on the DNA sequence effecting how genes 
 function) may be responsible for the protection in males and this will be investigated further.

 

 UKZN’s Vice-Chancellor, 
 Professor Nana Poku,
  congratulated Ramsuran on the award. 

 

 "I wish you well and trust that the award 
 will assist you in your future research endeavours," Poku said. 

 

 The Mercury