Durban - More than 400 people, some armed with sticks and pangas, embarked on a service delivery protest in Lamontville yesterday. The second day of protest action came after illegal electricity connections in the township’s informal settlement were removed, allegedly by residents in the formal housing. The large group of protesters blocked roads with burning tyres and rocks. On Monday, the municipal Sizakala Centre and six state vehicles were torched in protest action. Protesters from the township’s informal settlement are demanding proper electricity, and housing and water infrastructure. The residents in the formal housing said they had removed the illegal connections after numerous power cuts in the area due to overloading. Metro Police spokesperson Parboo Sewpersad said the informal dwellers blocked several roads yesterday, including the north- and southbound lanes of the N2 and M4 highways, Gwala Road and Radebe Street. Sewpersad said the situation was volatile and tense. “The protests started around 5am. The police managed to disperse the crowd. “There is strong visibility in the area as we want to make sure that no further disruption takes place,” he said. KwaZulu-Natal police spokes- person Colonel Thembeka Mbele said cases of public violence and malicious damage to property had been opened at the Lamontville police station for investigation. She said two men, aged 17 and 33, were arrested during the protest. Yesterday leaders of the protest action held a meeting with law enforcement authorities, residents and the local ward councillor to find resolutions. Speaking to The Mercury after the long meeting, councillor Nobabalu Mthembu said it was agreed that the protest action be halted while discussions were held. He said the informal settlement dwellers had raised several issues. “One of the challenges is that their houses are built underneath the electricity infrastructure and the municipality cannot install electricity in that area because it would cause a danger to them. “Their houses are also built on top of the main drainage system and therefore it would be difficult to install toilets in that area, but we will be engaging with them and we are hopeful that we will find a solution,” she said. Mthembu said that as from next Monday, there would be ongoing meetings that would be held to try and find solutions. “While we are dealing with those engagements, the protesters’ delegation assured us that there would be no further interruption taking place in the area,” said Mthembu. The Mercury