Durban - More than half of Covid-19 infections among government workers in KwaZulu-Natal affect employees from the Department of Education (DoE). This was revealed in a report by the Provincial Command Council to the standing committee on quality of life on Wednesday. This comes as teacher unions are exerting pressure on the Department of Basic Education to close schools in light of the rising Covid-19 infections and deaths. The committee has been informed that of 3 638 government employees who have tested positive for Covid-19 in the province, 1 569 are from the Education Department, second only to the Department of Health which has the highest infection rate at 1 780 employees. A distant third is the Department of Transport with 128 employees. Infections were identified in 621 of the province’s schools, with uMgungundlovu the worst-affected (120), followed by Pinetown (74), Zululand (70), uMlazi (60), Ugu (50), Harry Gwala (50) and uMkhanyakude with 15 cases. DA MPL and education spokesperson Imran Keeka said they feared the infection numbers could be worse as this was not the latest report. “This will remain a moving statistic and is a reflection of what is happening in communities. “The approach to curbing the rapid spread and fast-approaching spike will require everyone to band together to do their part. “This must include parents, pupils, educators and staff of the Department of Education. “Observing pupils removing their masks and totally disregarding physical distancing practices immediately upon leaving school premises is not only regrettable, but calamitous in the extreme,” he said. IFP MPL and education spokesperson Thembeni Madlopha Mthethwa said the statistics pointed to the fact that many people in the education sector could die. “As the IFP, we believe that in light of the challenges we are faced with, we would like to see the schools closed for at least three weeks.” Quality of life committee chairperson Phumzile Mbatha-Cele said they had received a report on the infections from the premier’s office, and were especially concerned about the infections in health. “We are very much concerned as a committee; we would like to impress on the Department of Health to ensure that the necessary personal protective equipment is provided and that protocols in managing this pandemic are adhered to by all,” she said. National Teachers Union president Allen Thompson said the numbers did not reflect the reality on the ground. “We believe there is an under-reporting in the numbers and that the number of the people affected is much higher.” National Professional Teachers’ Organisation of SA provincial chief executive Thirona Moodley said they received daily reports on infections at schools and had noticed pupils were not adhering to guidelines on social distancing and the wearing of masks as soon as they left school premises. The Mercury