Durban - A KwaZulu-Natal magistrate, whose lenient sentences of convicted child rapists has come under the spotlight, was suspended yesterday pending the outcome of an investigation into her fitness to hold office. Minister of Justice and Correctional Services Ronald Lamola provisionally suspended Kholeka Bodlani, acting Regional Court magistrate in uMlazi, Durban, following “serious irregularities and shortcomings” in her work. Spokesperson for the Department of Justice and Correctional Services, Chrispin Phiri, said that the matter had been referred to the minister by the Magistrates Commission after a judicial quality assessment. The assessment revealed that almost 20 of Bodlani’s cases had to be sent on special review following complaints of incompetence against her. The Mercury had previously reported on three child rape cases that had been sent on special judicial review, where two judges at the Durban High Court reviewed and set aside her sentences. The judges described her decisions in the cases involving minors as “shocking” and “deviating disproportionately” from the prescribed minimum sentence of life imprisonment for the rape of a minor. In one case, it was reported that Bodlani had set a man free after he was accused of raping a teenage girl. Her reasoning behind the merciful sentence was that the suspect carried a bag, styled his hair and enjoyed household chores which meant he must be gay and “not interested in women”. In another case, she handed down a wholly suspended sentence to a father accused of raping his 11-year-old daughter because he was “loving”. Bodlani had also asked a 7-year-old rape victim how she felt after she was raped by a man she called her uncle. She asked the child if the man was “rough, vigorous or forceful when penetrating you, or was he soft?” Review judges also questioned and overturned Bodlani’s sentencing of a family friend who had raped a 6-year-old girl. In her sentencing, Bodlani claimed the victim showed no signs of trauma and then sentenced him to seven years imprisonment, of which 10 years was wholly suspended. Review judges of the high court referred the matters back to the uMlazi Magistrate’s Court for sentencing proceedings to be heard again before another magistrate. Bodlani, who was appointed in 2013, was allocated to the Sexual Offences Court and dealt with cases of child victims who were raped by adults. The prescribed minimum sentence for such offences is life imprisonment. However, in almost all the finalised cases which were assessed, Bodlani imposed sentences where the accused were cautioned or strongly reprimanded or given wholly suspended sentences. Phiri said the suspended sentences she imposed were found to have been both “incompetent and incomplete”. “After a substantial number of Bodlani’s judgments went on special review to the high court, the reviewing judges raised serious questions about her suitability for judicial office. They found the sentences she imposed as, among others, “incorrect for incompleteness, incompetent, outrageous, disturbing to the extreme, shockingly inappropriate and completely contrary to the very factors relevant to sentencing,” Phiri said. In a statement from the department, it explained that in terms of the Magistrates Act, the minister, on the advice of the Magistrates Commission, may provisionally suspend a magistrate from office if the commission is satisfied that reliable evidence existed indicating that an allegation against that magistrate is of such a serious nature as to make it inappropriate for the magistrate to perform their functions while the allegation is being investigated. “Our judicial officers must display the highest levels of competency and ability. If they do not, it has the potential to undermine the administration of justice and may result in the community and the public in general losing faith in the ability of the courts to dispense fair and appropriate justice,” said Minister Lamola. Child Rights and Protection consultant and co-author of A Practical Approach to the Child Justice Act, Joan van Niekerk, welcomed Lamola’s decision to suspend the magistrate. However, she questioned how the department would deal with the harm caused to the victims “who may have felt let down by the court”. “When children speak up about abuse and when they are believed and action is taken, they expect absolute protection from the court,” Van Niekerk said. She said it was sad that in so many cases under Bodlani, the men had returned to their home or communities where they could have raped children. Van Niekerk said it was not a question of whether they repeated the offence but “it is the stress and fear within the victim of seeing this person again and walking about freely”. The Mercury