Durban - A group of protesters torched six municipal vehicles and a building in Lamontville on Monday after their illegal connections to the electricity grid in a near-by formal housing settlement, were cut off. In a statement, the eThekwini Municipality confirmed the burning of the Sizakala Centre and six state vehicles. The centre was home, among others, to the SA Social Security Agency and a clinic belonging to the provincial government. The protesters demanded proper electricity infrastructure. The informal settlement they live in is on provincial government land that was invaded and situated under power lines. The mayor of eThekwini, Mxolisi Kaunda, condemned the destruction of state property. “While we respect the right of the people to embark on peaceful protests, we view this latest incident in a very serious light. In fact, this is anarchy,” he said. “How do you demand electricity and destroy state property that is of help to the community? “This is treason as far as we are concerned and there is no amount of grievances that would justify this inhumane behaviour. “Those responsible must face the full might of the law, nothing else.” Kaunda said the city was plagued with land invasions which were fertile ground for illegal electricity and water connections. “As a result, our electricity transformers become overburdened and then malfunction. “Nevertheless, our electricians are on the ground and have restored power in all areas that have been affected by this unlawful conduct,” Kaunda added. He pleaded with residents to speak out about their grievances, rather than resorting to violent protests. According to a resident in formal housing, the informal settlement had been illegally connecting to the grid for more than four years. He said they had gone to the municipality to seek assistance as they had been experiencing constant power cuts for days as a result of the transformers burning due to overloading. “We spent more than a week without power. “We were told to deal with the illegal connections by ourselves, and we decided to disconnect all these illegal connections,” said the man. “We can’t keep having power cuts because of people who don’t pay for electricity. “We have suffered enough.” After the disconnections, informal dwellers began protesting, blocking several roads in the areas with burning tyres and rocks. The protesters also allegedly set alight a truck on South Coast Road. KZN police said the protesters attempted to loot the truck but when they found it had no cargo, they set it alight. KZN MEC for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta), Sipho Hlomuka, said: “The destruction of public property is unacceptable. “There can never be any justification for the burning of municipal infrastructure and vehicles which are meant to serve our communities.” He said the images and videos that circulated on social media showing the centre in flames were a clear indication that the incident was no accident. “It was caused by those who are seeking to undermine the provision of services to our communities.” The Mercury