Durban - eThekwini Municipality opposition parties yesterday called for a review of the city’s funeral policy for councillors after ratepayers paid R400 000 for the funerals of two ANC councillors recently. DA councillor Nicole Graham said her party was “deeply concerned” when the items had been raised on the executive committee agenda this week. “The two items were presented as a rule of order 28 items, meaning that mayor Mxolisi Kaunda has already taken the decision to spend the funds under the guise of an ‘emergency’. The breakdown is R200 000 each for the funerals of Bhekithemba Phungula and Nomusa Mthembu,” she said. She said it included that the grave lease for Phungula, R47000, be waived for 10 years, which was “completely inconsistent with an ordinary grave lease cost of around R1100”. “Whilst we mourn the losses of both councillors and send our condolences to the families and communities, this kind of expenditure at such a time as this is unthinkable. Funerals are currently limited to 50 people. How does a 50-person funeral cost R200000? Previously, expenditure on civic funerals has not been properly itemised and blank cheques were seemingly the order of the day.” Graham said the municipality was in a “dire financial position” with a drastically reduced cash flow and projected unemployment of 41%. She said a dignified funeral did not need to cost so much. “The sad reality of the eThekwini Municipality’s lockdown response is that everyone has had to take a hit but the ANC elite and those associated with them. People are starving, unemployed and watching their businesses collapse, but municipal funding seems to flow like water,” she said. Graham called for the policy, which allows for funerals to be funded up to a cost of R200 000, to be reviewed. IFP councillor Mdu Nkosi said the city needed to adjust the policy, especially in light of the Covid-19 pandemic. “The biggest thing is that with Covid-19 we are supposed to change that, but unfortunately it came as a rule of order 28, as a report of what happened, so we were not able to stop it as opposition parties. It was like water under the bridge (sic),” he said. Nkosi said the city should have reduced the sum to R100000 per funeral, but had argued that big screens had to be hired to live-stream the funeral because of the limitation on the number of mourners allowed to attend. “The country does not have a lot of money since Covid-19, and people are dying all over and are hungry. Whatever money we have, we are supposed to save it to buy food parcels for people. R200000 for a funeral is too much,” he said. eThekwini municipal spokesperson Msawakhe Mayisela said the council had a long-standing policy to support the bereaved families of all deceased councillors, regardless of political affiliation. “This issue was discussed extensively at our exco meeting yesterday, and there was a consensus to review the policy, given the current economic climate and the impact Covid-19 has had on the city’s finances,” he said. “The city leadership will table a full report at expo and council for further deliberation on the policy.” He said it was “quite unfortunate” that the DA had “decided to grand-stand on such a sensitive matter”. “The city sincerely apologises to families for this anti-ubuntu (sic) conduct of the DA,” he said. Graham lashed back yesterday, saying that when ordinary people died the funeral was a family responsibility. “As the municipality we should be looking after poor people who are desperate and starving and having their lights cut off because the city says there is no money,” she said. The Mercury