Durban - The SA Social Security Agency has changed and separated the payment dates for the older person and disability grants with effect from August to ensure the uninterrupted payment of social grants. The agency announced at the weekend disability grants would no longer be paid with older persons grants on the first day of payment. “In terms of the further staggering of payment dates to be introduced from August 2020, the older persons grant will be paid from August 3. Disability grants will be paid from August4 and all other grants will be paid from August 5,” said Sassa’s chief executive, Totsie Memela. Memela said any grants linked to those accounts would be made available on the same dates. Due to the lockdown regulations, the agency announced various measures in place to ensure physical distancing was maintained, including separating grant payment dates. The agency said these measures would be implemented to further enforce social distancing and reduce the number of people who reported to the grant access points on any one day. “All the social grant access points, such as post offices and merchants, attract a high number of beneficiaries trying to access their money on the same day, which is a risk to especially the aged and those with disabilities. “The government decided that the country remains on level 3 of the lockdown as a precautionary measure to ensure that the spread of the virus is contained and lives are spared. “Therefore,” Memela said, “we urge the public to work with the government to ensure that the curve of this virus is flattened by complying with the staggered payment dates.” She said it was well known that elderly people were the most vulnerable to the virus, adding the agency had come up with strategies to ensure all people’s safety was given priority. “The staggering of grants started after the lockdown, and we should see this as an extension of this process to further limit the number of beneficiaries at payment facilities. “The process will be monitored closely and further staggering is not ruled out in the near future, because we need to comply with government protocols of social distancing and the washing of hands,” said Memela. She added that beneficiaries should remember they were not compelled to withdraw their money on the first payment date, but could withdraw it on any day after the payment date as it would remain in their accounts until they withdrew it. Mercury