Durban - The South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) started making double payments to the recipients of the Covid-19 special Social Relief of Distress Grant this week. According to the agency, the double payments were for the outstanding June and July accounts. The KwaZulu-Natal Sassa spokesperson, Sandy Godlwana, said this was meant to avoid a situation where beneficiaries of the grant had to make two trips to the post office and to eradicate the backlog of payments. The R350 grant is meant to help those who are unemployed and receiving no other financial assistance. Last month, the agency said it was flooded with grievances about the declined R350 grant applications. At the time, Sassa said most applicants were already on the Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF) database or were qualifying to receive it. “Sassa also reconsidered applications made in May against updated databases received, which resulted in an additional 1million applicants being approved for the grant. “This will drastically reduce the number of potential appeals and will also cushion the affected beneficiaries against the impact of the lockdown,” said Godlwana. She said the agency was working with government entities such as Home Affairs to confirm the identity number and if the person was alive. They also work with the SA Revenue Service to confirm that the applicant does not pay tax or for UIF. Godlwana said if there was an error or they received a list that was not up to date, payments would not be made. She said after receiving a number of complaints, the agency had to request a new list for verification. “Since we have paid 1million of those applications, we are still going to pay more that are yet to receive the grant even though they qualify. “There are also those who have used various application methods where they applied through WhatsApp, email and online, so we have to make sure we don’t make payment duplications.” Godlwana said payments for June and July had started with transfers into the bank accounts of those who had them. She said payments for those who received their money through the post office would be done progressively throughout the month. According to Godlwana, this was done to limit the number of people at the post offices daily. “Beneficiaries are reminded that they should only visit the post office once they have received an SMS saying their money has been paid and is ready for collection,” she said. The Mercury