Durban - Pietermaritzburg residents have had enough of the fires at the New England Road landfill site and want it to be moved. Yesterday, a group, including representatives from schools, protested close to the landfill site after yet another fire broke out on Monday. The fire, which the council said yesterday was now under control, forced several schools to close. They will only reopen on Monday. There were reports that residents in Scottsville feared for their health. Naomi Hardman, a business manager from the St John’s Diocesan School for Girls, said community activism was the best way to get the municipality to respond to their concerns and move the landfill site. She said the protest was the start. “That dump is finished, it has reached its capacity and should be closed and moved elsewhere.” Hardman said three schools in the area, St Johns, Epworth and St Charles College, had formed an organisation called Love Pietermaritzburg that was dedicated to lobbying for the better management of the landfill, but, ideally, wanted it to be moved. The schools have about 2000 pupils. Apart from these schools, thousands of pupils studying in Sobantu township are also affected as it is directly across from the dump. Hardman said that since the last fire in October, which was bad, they had tried several times to engage with the municipality and the provincial government on the issue, but not much had been achieved. She said they had engaged with the contractor managing the landfill. “The person running the landfill now used to run an organisation in Sobantu that advocated for better management of the landfill. “He told me the equipment was broken and waste could not be compacted properly, which then left air pockets that led to fires. “He said about R30million is needed for equipment, but the council had yet to invest the money,” she said. A few weeks ago, Msunduzi mayor Mzimkhulu Thebollal told The Mercury that the council needed to invest about R30m in yellow plant equipment at the landfill. Hardman said residents needed to take action. “Our lawyer advised us we cannot take legal action until all other avenues have been exhausted, and that’s why we need to take these civic actions. “Because of the fire on Tuesday, the schools had to close. “I am concerned about the health of some of our pupils because we have very young pupils. We have also had pupils leave our schools because of this dump.” Municipal spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said she was aware of the protest. She said the fire was under control due to the work of four firefighting teams from Msunduzi Municipality, uMgungundlovu District Municipality, eThekwini Metro and Working on Fire. “The municipality would like to apologise to all residents of Msunduzi, the schools and the communities that are directly affected by this incident. “We urge residents to keep windows and doors closed to limit exposure to the smoke. “Children, elderly persons and particularly those with respiratory conditions are urged to stay indoors or move to unaffected areas, where possible. Residents are further advised to consult their nearest health centres should they experience breathing difficulties.” The Mercury