Durban - Sherwood residents are up in arms over plans by the Islamic Medical Association (IMA) to open a Covid-19 care facility in the area. The irate residents said they only found out through rumours that a centre would be operated from a five-bedroom house, claiming that the IMA had neither told them or sought their consent. They warned that should the KwaZulu-Natal Health Department grant them permission to operate, legal action would be instituted against the association. Shuayba Mahomed, a lawyer representing the residents, said people were concerned about health implications. “We are concerned about the underhanded way they tried to do this. We found out about it this Sunday. Had we not objected, they would have had patients there on Monday. “The house was already equipped with beds and oxygen tanks,” she said. She said having a centre caring for patients with a disease that no one fully understood in a residential area was irresponsible. “We have written to the Department of Health to alert them that even if the centre is given the go-ahead, this is not something that we are going to take lying down,” she said. In a letter to the department through an attorney’s office, the residents said: “We wish to enquire as to whether this facility has obtained the requisite documents from the Department of Health in order to operate such (a) facility.” The letter said the residents understood that no permission had been granted, but the house had indeed been set up to provide oxygen to Covid-19 patients. “Should the facility be in possession of the relevant certification, we require information as to all steps taken by the Department of Health prior to granting such certification,” the letter said. “Please note that the residents are averse to the operation of such a facility and will object to its operation due to various health implications related to the Covid 19 pandemic which is well known worldwide,” said the letter. Shabier Omar from the IMA said there had been a lot of misconceptions about the matter. “We are doing a feasibility study that aims to provide oxygen relief to all those that are experiencing breathing distress. If it is not feasible, we will move it elsewhere.” He denied that the house was already equipped with beds. Ward councillor Warren Burne said a meeting would be scheduled to engage with the residents and listen to their concerns. “I have an understanding of what the facility is and it sounds necessary, but I would like to hear from residents.” “If your neighbour has Covid-19, that does not mean they should leave the neighbourhood.” The Department of Health did not respond to requests for comment. The Mercury