Durban - A former IFP leader and her husband died in a fire that gutted their home in Ngwelezane, near Empangeni, on Sunday night. Dr Lissa Joyce Themba Mthalane, 80, and her husband, Baldwin Mthalane, 84, died in the blaze. Dr Mthalane is a long-standing member of the IFP and was one of the first females to serve in the then KwaZulu-Natal government under the leadership of IFP president Mangosuthu Buthelezi. The former matron at Ngwelezane Hospital was also the IFP’s first female health portfolio committee chairperson in the democratic Parliament. The couple’s son, Vuyo Mthalane, said they were devastated by the tragic deaths which comes shortly after the family buried another relative. “We feel powerless. We cannot even plan their funeral because of the nature of their deaths and the loss of important documents in the fire, which makes it difficult to proceed with funeral arrangements,” he said. Mthalane said they were still waiting for the forensic report on what may have caused the fire, but assume it was a candle. He added that his parents’ deaths would affect a lot of people, as many depended on them for employment. His parents had businesses and were involved in farming. IFP leader Blessed Gwala said the party was shattered by the news and described Dr Mthalane as one of the party’s visionary leaders. “The IFP conveys its condolences to the family. The IFP prides itself on identifying, moulding and recognising Dr Mthalane’s capabilities, and those of other women in government. This bears testimony that the IFP has always believed in the ability of visionary women leaders,” said Gwala. Phikelakhe Ntanzi, a ward councillor in the area, said the couple were well known for their contribution to the community. “The family have always been important figures in the community. After being in Parliament, Dr Mthalane and her husband spent their retirement years helping out in the community and have been part of a local church and were good businesspeople.” Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele said they were investigating a case, adding that inquest dockets had been opened. The Mercury