Durban - Graduates from the University of KwaZulu-Natal were left frustrated after the institution failed to meet the deadline for issuing their qualifications and academic records. The university said it had worked tirelessly on this matter. However, they were still unable to meet their deadline for the release of eCertificates and eTranscripts on July 17. As per the Covid-19 regulations, the institution had to cancel traditional graduation ceremonies and host its graduation virtually. “Due to the fact that UKZN has traditionally only produced hard copy degree certificates and academic transcripts that are printed, signed and packed manually for the more than 10000 graduates in a graduation season, an alternate plan needed to be made for the 2020 certificates and transcripts,” said Dr Kathy Cleland, UKZN's registrar. Cleland said they had to acquire an eCertificate system and link it with their ITS Graduation data. She said that took considerable time and effort, as both South Africa and the UK, where their international partner was based, were in the throes of various stages of lockdown, with the majority of staff working remotely. Cleland said staff worked until late, and while the majority of downloads worked, a number of critical downloads had failed repeatedly. “I then, unfortunately, had to call a halt to the process, to give the technical teams time to explore the potential issues. I, together with the entire graduation team, am acutely aware of the disappointment and frustration this ongoing delay has caused many of our graduates, and for this, I wish to apologise unreservedly,” she said. According to Cleland, working with a new system and integrating that with their database, all while working remotely, had taken its toll. “The process of issuing 11000 graduation certificates is not without its complications in ‘normal’ times, as there are a number of checks and balances and quality checks that have to be done every step of the way to ensure the integrity of the process.” However, Students’ Representative Council (SRC) president Sfiso Simelane said graduates had been waiting too long and their patience was wearing thin. Simelane said graduates were frustrated as they were meant to receive their qualifications weeks ago. He said the process of sending certificates and transcripts was supposed to start on July6. He said they were told the institution had experienced a number of security issues that caused a delay. Last week, said Simelane, the registrar had issued a communiqué that there was a delay in issuing certificates and transcripts due to security issues. “There is a delay, and we are aware of the issue. We have been communicating with management for them to get to the bottom of this. “Some students have raised concerns because they are supposed to start working, and producing a qualification is part of the job requirements. Therefore, it’s a horrible situation for students to find themselves in, but we are pressuring the university to sort this out,” said Simelane. The Mercury