Durban - Six commuters sustained multiple injuries after the taxi they were travelling in was shot at by gunmen in Inanda on Wednesday. According to KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele, the incident happened just after 7pm along the M25 in Inanda. This is the second taxi-related shooting on the same road in the past two weeks. “It is alleged that suspects travelling in a vehicle opened fire on a moving taxi full of passengers, causing the taxi to crash down an embankment,” Mbele said. She confirmed that six passengers were injured and taken to hospital for medical attention. “Charges of attempted murder are being investigated by the Inanda police,” said Mbele. Two weeks ago, on the same M25 road, a 51-year-old woman died while seven others were injured after the minibus taxi they were in was shot at by gunmen in a bakkie. The taxi, affiliated to the Ndwedwe and District Taxi Association, was carrying 15 passengers when gunmen opened fire on it. In a video taken after the incident, a taxi is stuck on the embankment while several passengers are seen lying on the ground. Kwanele Ncalane, spokesperson for the Department of Transport, Community Safety and Liaison, said it was worrying that commuters were being caught up in taxi-related violence. Ncalane said it was the worst form of cruelty and brutality when people, because of their own problems and issues, put the lives of innocent commuters at risk. He said the department was taking very serious steps in dealing with such cases. “We are not saying that when operators kill each other it’s fine, but when it’s an innocent commuter who had nothing to do with conflicts, it is more painful,” said Ncalane. He said the MEC for Transport, Bheki Ntuli, had convened a meeting with the provincial police management to discuss measures to strengthen security along hot-spot routes. Ncalane said they were optimistic that those behind the shootings would be arrested soon. He said the law would deal very harshly with them, especially in the previous case where the commuter was killed. “Parallel to that, we are engaging the associations themselves so that we understand what the issues are in that area. We also want to see how we can work together to protect the commuters. “Commuters are the clients - whatever it is that is happening, their safety should be prioritised. We are hoping that this was the last incident.” The Mercury