Durban restaurateurs and their staff took to the streets yesterday in the national Million Seats on the Streets campaign calling for the unbanning of alcohol consumption with meals and the removal of the lockdown level 3 curfew that is destroying their businesses. And just as restaurateurs raised their voices against the ban, the official South African Government Twitter account tweeted that: “The ban on the sale of alcohol and cigarettes will remain in place throughout the lockdown period. "The purpose is to save lives and protect the health and well-being of our people.” Hours later government backtracked and tweeted: “This account posted a tweet earlier today which said that the ban on the sale of alcohol and cigarettes would remain in place throughout the lockdown period. The sale of alcohol and tobacco products is prohibited under the current level 3 regulations. "This decision could be reviewed at any time by the relevant structures should the conditions which necessitated it change. We regret any confusion the tweet has caused.” Restaurant Association of South Africa chief executive Wendy Alberts said the protest had been successful across the country, and suppliers and patrons had shown their support. She said Tourism Minister Mmamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane had joined her for a coffee to discuss the plight of the industry. Alberts handed a memorandum to the minister in which the industry called for the unbanning of alcohol, while using technology to limit sales to certain areas and suggesting communities which use alcohol irresponsibly should be monitored by the SANDF. The memorandum also called for the removal of the curfew as it affected trading hours. Restaurateurs and their staff took to the streets in their numbers in uMhlanga yesterday. South African chefs association KZN Secretary, Jodi Gillespie, said waiters and chefs had joined the protest. “There was a turnout of about 100. We were only there 40 minutes because we didn’t want to create a scene. We made our point and everyone was hooting,” she said. Restaurateur José Gonçalves, who owns Little Havana and Havana Grill, said he had opened for 12 days during lockdown but it was a failure without being able to serve alcohol. However, he said he did not participate in the protest, as his restaurant was closed. “Five or six of us restaurants here in uMhlanga have decided we won’t open until alcohol is unbanned.” Graham Bennett, owner of The Firehouse, said he had put his stools on the pavement to protest but removed them when he saw metro police demanding that other restaurants take tables and chairs inside. He was disappointed by the "lack of solidarity" among restaurateurs in Florida Road as some had not participated in the protest. EThekwini metro police spokesperson Parboo Sewpersad said: “They had no permission to put stuff on the roadway or the pavements. It was illegal." No arrests had been made or fines issued. The Mercury