Durban - If you've wandered through the streets of Ballito on the KZN north coast, there is a good chance that you've come across a beautifully painted rock. Well, that rock is just one of hundreds of uniquely painted rocks which have been hidden in parts of the town and form part of Ballito Rocks. Janine Ferreira, said Ballito Rocks is an initiative based on The Kindness Rocks Project started in 2015 by Meagan Murphy in USA. "The idea is to decorate rocks with either a beautiful pattern; or picture; a word of encouragement; or an uplifting statement and then hide your rock in a public space for a stranger to find. The objective is to spread kindness, happiness and positivity through rocks," she said. Ferreira said if people happen to find a rock, they can keep or re-hide it if the design on the rock resonated with them. "The Facebook group called Ballito Rocks was established, which people post to when they find rocks or are going out to hide rocks in the Ballito area. This platform has enabled the initiative to gain traction and build a community of like-minded individuals who are all participating in this movement," she said. Ferreira created the Facebook group after she came across The Kindness Rocks Project and many international rock groups while searching online for ideas for art rocks, which she had recently taken up as a hobby. "This led her to the idea to create a local rock group for Ballito and surrounds. The response has been phenomenal! Our group currently has approximately 650 members and growing. “The initiative definitely sparked an interest from the children in the community who really love decorating, hiding and finding rocks. It has become a good reason to get outdoors and go for a walk on the beachfront promenade, which seems to be the hotspot for rocks currently," she said. Ferreira said there are many of their children who are too young for Facebook who are also participating. "I would guess well over 1000 people are actively involved.  We have also had a few private establishments who have come on board and offered their premises, which are open to the public) as hiding spots. They are the Litchi Orchard, Flag Animal Farm and even our preferred local art supply store 10/10 Stationers,'' she said. Ferreira thanked members from the group who have been a part of the projet. ''You probably don't even realise how much you may have positively impacted another person during these tough times, just by decorating a rock. I hope for this initiative to continue to grow both in Ballito and hopefully in other communities too,''  Ferreira said. The Mercury