Durban – The global spread of the Covid-19 pandemic has forced the organisers of the world famous Comrades Marathon race between Durban and Pietermartizburg to cancel this year's event. It is only the second time in the 100-year history that organisers have had to cancel the race. The last time the race was cancelled was in 1941, during World War II, and resumed in 1946, the year after the war ended. On Thursday, the event organisers said that following a long discussion with the Comrades Marathon Association (CMA) Board and KwaZulu-Natal Athletics (KZNA), Athletics South Africa (ASA) announced the cancellation of the 2020 Comrades Marathon. Aleck Skhosana, president of ASA said that cancelling what would have been the 95th edition of the Comrades Marathon was a long and arduous decision to make. "With the race’s rich history, its powerful nation-building attributes and contribution towards social cohesion, as well as its immense economic impact, it would have been premature to rush into an outright cancellation sooner. However, we believe we have jointly arrived at the correct decision to protect the health and safety of all concerned as well as the lives of our fellow South Africans,” he said CMA chairperson Cheryl Winn said it was with "profound sadness and regret" that the CMA Board, in conjunction with ASA and KZNA, had to cancel the race. "We do so with the knowledge that it will come as a great disappointment to thousands of Comrades runners, who together with us at CMA, have been holding out hope that the race would somehow proceed," she said. “We had hoped to postpone The Ultimate Human Race to a date not later than end of September (owing to climatic conditions), but alas with the Covid-19 pandemic showing no signs of abating and anticipated to peak in the coming months, there is no telling what is yet to come. As CMA, it is incumbent upon us to prioritise the health, safety and well-being of our athletes, volunteers and stakeholders and therefore lamentably we will not be staging this year’s edition of the country’s leading road running event,” Winn said. Jay Reddy, KZN Athletics Administrator told athletes and the public not to despair. "Let us rather celebrate that as athletes and other role players, we are sacrificing one of our major races in the knowledge that we are serving the interests of humanity. As KZNA we stand united in our endeavour to overcome the devastating consequences of this disease. We call upon all our members and associates to engage in strategies to address the broader issues of the environment and the pressing needs of our people in the true spirit of the Comrades. We urge our athletes to continue to observe the Covid-19 regulations, engage in activity responsibly and take every precaution to prevent the spread of the virus,” he said. Winn reassured runners on a number of practical issues, advising CMA will deal with the roughly 2 500 foreign and 25 000 South African entries received for the 2020 Comrades Marathon as follows:   This means that the #Comrades2021 will now be the 95th edition of The Ultimate Human Race, starting from the Pietermaritzburg City Hall at 5.3am0 and finishing 12 hours later at the Moses Mabhida Stadium in Durban. It will be the 47th Down Run which will also celebrate the Centenary of the Comrades Marathon Association which was founded on May 24, 1921. According to the organisers, exactly 80 years ago, Comrades Marathon organisers faced a similar dilemma in deciding whether to stage the 20th Comrades Marathon some eight months into the conflagration of World War II. At the last moment it was decided to go ahead with 23 starters, following the withdrawal of many runners who had been mobilised for the war effort. Only 10 runners completed the 1940 Comrades Marathon. The following year the race was cancelled and remained so for the duration of the war (1941 - 1945), as the organisers, runners and supporters stood in solidarity with all those who suffered the horrors and atrocities of war, similar to that of the World War I which had inspired the Comrades Marathon’s humble beginnings. “We thank each of our runners, supporters, volunteers and our incredible sponsors for their patience, fortitude and steadfast support over the past two months during which we have wrangled with this difficult decision. Sad as it is, as CMA we can now turn our focus towards the staging of our Centenary Celebrations next year in the comfort of knowing we can rely on the passionate loyalty and participation of so many. With reference to the inspirational theme of the cancelled edition Iphupho Lami / Dare to Dream, hope is a dream deferred,” said Winn.” Daily News