Durban – TWO Chatsworth men have thanked God after the pair survived a bush knife attack by robbers in their home early yesterday morning. Cleophas Govender, 23, heard a bang and other noises just after 3am. When he got into the lounge to investigate, he noticed it had been ransacked and the door and gate were wide open. He rushed out with a baseball bat, thinking that his family was outside the house, chasing the robbers. “I found one of the robbers at the gate and pulled him aside. I thought I had caught him. Next, all hell broke loose. Another robber struck me from behind. Three others joined in on the attack. I was down on the floor, with blood oozing from my hand.” His sister Claudette, who had awoken from the sounds of the commotion, screamed from the balcony above, alerting neighbours. She also threw whatever came to hand at the robbers to get them off her brother. “I went hysterical. I threw whatever I could at them, including energy booster cans. The gang has been involved in three other robberies in our area in the past few months. We want an increase in police patrols,” she said. Their uncle, Michael Govender, 62, a pensioner who lives in a building on the property, said the persistent barking of his neighbour's dog woke him. When he peered through the window from the building, he saw strangers in the yard. Armed with a stick, he confronted one of the robbers, as he saw his nephew being pummelled and bleeding from his wounds. He struck two of the robbers. “I was unaware how many robbers there were. A third struck me on my forehead with a bush knife. The same guy pulled his colleague away and they fled,” he said. Govender sustained a gash, which extended from his eyebrow to the top of his head. “We think there were six of them in total. They took the TV. We are checking for what else might have been taken.” Uncle and nephew received medical attention at RK Khan Hospital in Chatsworth, and were discharged. Cleophas’s right arm received 20 stitches. He also sustained a cut to his left wrist and had a cut across his back. “There are many robberies that we hear of on a daily basis. I was also held up on five different occasions while walking to work. We thank the neighbours for their moral support,” Cleophas said. Police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said Chatsworth SAPS were investigating a case of robbery and attempted murder. Yesterday’s incident came after robbers entered a Malvern home on Tuesday evening. Blue Security was alerted after a neighbour heard a gunshot. Spokesperson Andreas Mathios said a Blue Security armed-response officer and area manager were immediately dispatched to the property. “An undisclosed number of suspects gained access to the property. A shot was fired and the suspects fled, dropping a cellphone. They escaped in an unknown direction,” he said. Daily News