Independent Media has announced a number of key editorial appointments in KwaZulu-Natal, including new editors for both daily newspaper titles. Philani Mazibuko has been appointed as as the new editor of The Mercury, taking over from Yogas Nair, who will be taking up a senior appointment within the wider group. Ayanda Mdluli, who heads the group’s Special Investigations Unit, has been appointed as the new editor of the Daily News. Mazibuko, who was The Mercury’s deputy editor, has been an integral member of the newspaper’s editorial team for more than 15 years. He joined The Mercury as a junior reporter in 2000 and has covered various beats, among them education, local government, business and politics. He also held the position of The Mercury’s news editor before assuming the role of deputy editor. “It is a privilege and an honour to be appointed as editor of The Mercury. This is a newspaper that is well known for its proud tradition of quality and balanced reporting, and this is the tradition I intend to protect and advance,” Mazibuko said. “This title has been edited by some of the most talented and finest editors who have made their mark in the profession. My team and I will work very hard to ensure that the readers of this newspaper continue to view it in high esteem.” Other appointments Sandile Mdadane has been appointed editor of Sunday Tribune, while former acting editor of the Daily News, Zoubair Ayoob, has been appointed editor of The Independent on Saturday. He takes over from Mazwi Xaba, who will assume the position of managing editor for the region. Executive chairman of Independent Media, Dr Iqbal Survé, in congratulating the team, remarked: “2020 has been a year of change and challenge for almost everyone in the country, if not beyond our borders. “We have taken the viewpoint that these challenges are actually opportunities for a fresh start, for rethinking how we work and then, of course, in injecting new energy into the changing nature of media. “For the past few years, growing and nurturing our own pool of talent has been a priority in order to ensure a truly transformed and diverse editorial leadership team. These moves bear testimony to the investment that we have made in our transformation strategy. “Mazwi, Sandile, Philani, Zoubair and Ayanda have an abundance of experience and energy to lead these titles into the next chapter of their existence and we are excited to see what they deliver. “I congratulate each one of them for their achievements and look forward to sharing in further successes in the future.”