Durban - ETHEKWINI Municipality has sought to allay ratepayers’ fears that the proposed amendments to the city’s land use schemes were aimed at resettling informal dwellers from shack settlements. The municipality published the proposed amendments for public comment recently. Several residents received WhatsApp notices to object to the amendments during the comment period which ended yesterday, as it was feared that it would mean the city could relocate residents to available open spaces. An objection letter addressed to Reservoir Hills residents called for public support to oppose the city’s proposal as it would “allow the relocation and resettlement of residents at the discretion of the council to any open public spaces as they deem fit”. A petition addressed to Westville residents said if the proposed amendment was not opposed, it would give the council freedom to use land without the permission of ratepayers. However, municipality spokesperson Msawakhe Mayisela said there was no need for concern. He said the municipality was in the process of amending clause 1.13 in all its land use schemes namely in the Central, North, South, Inner West and Outer West regions. He said the current schemes in operation in the eThekwini municipal area, all contain a clause relating to the temporary use of any premises for no more than 28 days in a calendar year. The clause allows certain flexibility for all properties with regard to existing zoning, he said. “In order to allow for an extension to this period, it is proposed to amend the clause to 52 days in a calendar year,” he said. Mayisela said the amendment was to assist the public who wish to hold for example, a church or school fete once a week, flea markets, circuses and other public activities, as well as the repurposing of property for health, institutional and other community uses. “A land use scheme, while it is mainly about guiding and enforcing land uses, also needs to be flexible enough to foresee certain circumstances arising and plan for that eventuality,” he said. He said members of the public would have to apply for permission from the head of Development Planning, Environment and Management unit to use the clause to allow relevant departments such as Fire and Environmental Health to be informed of the activity. “The clause does not permit the temporary use to remain indefinitely,” said Mayisela. The DA caucus leader in eThekwini, Nicole Graham, said the justification for the amendment was to help people make money as Covid-19 had affected many people financially. Graham said the amendment was concerning because the existing schemes in various areas had been badly enforced. “There are already far too many people who use their properties in a way that the schemes do not permit and there is not enough enforcement,” she said. She questioned how the city would maintain control if a temporary lapse in permissions were allowed and noted that there were reasons why the regulations existed. “I think the city’s Covid-19 business relief strategies were good, but I think this one is a disaster,” she said. IFP leader Mdu Nkosi said he did not know where the confusion came from. “There is absolutely nothing wrong about it. It’s an existing policy and the only thing that I have noticed is the changing of days from 28 to 52 … to me there is no harm with that amendment,” he said. Former eThekwini municipal manager Michael Sutcliffe, said the regulation applied to private land and land owners would need to apply for temporary use which the city would evaluate before granting permission. “I don’t see what all the fuss is about. It’s a fairly standard thing. It’s not like the temporary use is being extended to three days a week but to 52 days, which is one day a week. “It’s to make provision for things like churches and it doesn’t mean you will just be able to open up a panel beating shop,” he said. The Mercury