Durban - SCHOOLS across KwaZulu-Natal are expected to be closed as the impact of Cosatu’s national stay-away today bites into the already tough schedule teachers and pupils have been following to recover from school days lost during the national Covid-19 lockdown. SA Democratic Teachers Union (Sadtu) KZN Secretary, Nomarashiya Caluza, said the union would “fully participate” in the strike. “Understanding that Sadtu has the majority in members in the Department of Education, we expect many schools to be closed,” Caluza said. Cosatu earlier said it had mobilised workers to campaign against corruption, gender-based violence, unemployment/retrenchments and the dishonouring of collective agreements, while calling for decent and affordable public transport and health and safety in the workplace. According to Cosatu’s protest programme, striking workers are expected to travel in a motorcade to central Durban areas and will also picket outside businesses and organisations that the union alleges have not complied with occupational health and safety regulations and have not yet paid their staff Temporary Employment Relief Scheme UIF funds. Unions supporting the industrial action include the SA Democratic Teachers Union, the Democratic Nurses’ Organisation of SA (Denosa), the National Union of Metal Workers of SA and the National Education, Health and Allied Workers Union. Denosa provincial secretary Mandla Shabangu said the union’s workers prioritised patient care, and only nurses who were on leave or off had been encouraged to participate. He said the strike was a “critical point” in collective bargaining because if it was unsuccessful it meant negotiating wage increases with employers was pointless if agreements could later be discarded. Durban metro police spokesperson, Senior Superintendent Parboo Sewpersad, said that since the strike was legal, police were not expecting any violent demonstrations. Sewpersad said plans were in place to ensure that the public were not affected by the strike. “We have formed a joint partnership as the metro police together with the Road Traffic Inspectorate (RTI) and the SAPS to ensure that we maintain law and order. “We do not expect any road blockade, and if that happens we will have to intervene,” he said. The Mercury