Durban - More people are being arrested for transporting drugs in and out of KwaZulu-Natal. On Tuesday police arrested a man who was travelling in a long distance bus with two suitcases and a bag full of dagga. Police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said on Tuesday at 9.30pm, police had received information about a man travelling in a bus from Durban to Bloemfontein and carrying dagga in his luggage. “The bus was intercepted on the N3 freeway northbound in Howick and a search was conducted,” said Gwala. “Three suitcases containing dagga weighing 42kg was found. A 25-year-old suspect was placed under arrest for dealing in dagga.” Gwala said the man appeared before the Howick Magistrate’s Court on Wednesday but the results of the court appearance were unknown. Earlier this month Hluhluwe police officers seized dagga worth R3 million one night. Provincial police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele said Hluhluwe police officers were following up on information about two vehicles smuggling dagga between Swaziland and Hluhluwe. Mbele said the officers were led to the N2 freeway at the Phinda turn off where they spotted and stopped two vehicles with six occupants. “A search was conducted and the two vehicles were found loaded with bags of dagga. The estimated street value of the recovered dagga is R3 million,” said Mbele. “A total of six suspects aged between 23 and 42 were placed under arrest.” Mbele said it was established that the suspects were also in the country illegally as they failed to produce the required documents. Also this month the Pietermaritzburg Flying Squad recovered 25 40kg bags of dagga. The estimated street value of the dagga was R1.1 million and a 48-year-old man was arrested for dealing and transporting dagga. In September Louwsberg police arrested a 40-year-old man for drug possession. He was transporting 58 bags of dagga loaded inside a taxi and in between the seats. The dagga was estimated to be valued at R2.5 million. Also in September, police recovered 11 bags of dagga weighing 705kg in the Vryheid area, in northern KZN. The dagga was estimated to be worth R2 million. It was being transported by a 39-year-old man who was arrested for drug possession. Daily News 